

--- Page 1 ---

Bapru Marma

Karma & The King

Once upon a time there was a king. He was a vicious
ruler of the kingdom. And so was her queen! The
citizens despised the king and queen. The abomination
was evident across the country. People resorted to
rampant theft just to defy king’s order and hinder works
in any way possible. King would execute commoner
even for a slight change in mood. If a maid forgot to put
one less spoon of sugar in tea, if a servant forgot to pull
away the blinds in the morning imprisoning servants was
his second nature. On the other hand, queen would
spend her morning hours dressing in front of palatial
giant mirrors. Even slight leery looks from servants
would warrant being thrown off into the moat. A deep-
rooted contempt was rampant among commoners. All
people talked about enthusiastically was how to

10


--- Page 2 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

dethrone the royals, night and day. The king would
engage in cruelties such as- parading severely beaten
people around the town to warn off future defaulters.
People solemnly prayed for the day in the kingdom
when freedom and justice would emerge as saviour. But
that seemed like a distant dream far off reality. And
answer stayed a distant mirage somewhere in the

impossible realm.

Farmer's barns brimmed with golden rice paddocks and
greeneries. Dense forests harboured crystal clear
waterfalls. The kingdom was prosperous. Except
happiness was nowhere to be found. Cruelty and
injustice plagued the kingdom. Even with all the riches
and wealths the king was unhappy for he would start the
year in a cheery mood but as the months progressed
instead his mood would swing to a melancholic frantic
state. A horrible disease caused the king’s suffering.
Nobody ever heard of the king's weird disease ever
anywhere. Towards the end of the year as autumn was
around the corner and so was the king's headache,
progressively devolving into utter chaotic howling. The
excruciating pain would drive the king on the brink of

becoming a sheer madman, he would stop eating and

11


--- Page 3 ---

Bapru Marma

wailed loudly day and night. He summoned all great
healers, herbalists, shamans, wizards, and sorcerers
that lived in the country to remedy the excruciating pain.
At the beginning the healers, though sceptical, were
very much keen on recuperating the king. On a whim the
disease went from being harder to treat to impossible
ventures for healers as the king condemned flailing
healers to death sentence. After a while, it became
untenable to find a single healer let alone a herbalist
who are inferior in rank and file compared to healers!
The king searched for a cure everywhere. All avenues
for treating the horrible and malignant disease were
exhausted. Every nook and cranny were turned upside
down. But alas! None of the approaches were fruitful as
each turned out to be a humongous futile effort! With all
fortune and wealth in the world, he couldn't cure himself.
No healers dared to bet their lives over the king's cure.
Fear of execution drove many healers out of the country.
There were rumours that whoever went to cure the king
but failed, were executed on the spot. Nobody could
locate those healers afterwards. After examining the
king thoroughly, the healers, herbalists, shamans,

wizards, sorcerers all stuttered to explain the reason

12


--- Page 4 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

‘bshind the mysterious disease. The few who dared to
divulge the truth were introduced to king's sword.

As the king continued to ravage through the kingdom for
@ cure one day 2 brave shaman decided to front him and
‘honourabie king. | have never witnessed such 2 disease
in my whole fife. | don’t know how to parley the message

r

to you.

Tell me now. What's my disease? How can ift be cured?”

The shaman siammered, “My king im your previous iife
you were bom as a dog and.........”.

No sooner had the word rang into ‘kinc's ear he drew jhis
jong sword and shaman met his untimely fate.

few were more than happy to flee the county and spend
the rest of their Iffe in exile and solitude.

As the days passed the disease worsened. The ‘king
was desperate to find a cure. The king was desparate
for any healers but alas there were none!


--- Page 5 ---

Bapru Marma

One day one servant from the edge of the country

informed the queen that there lived a great healer, a
monk, at the peak of a mountain. The only catch is that
the monk never leaves the monastery through rain, hail
or sunshine. The queen felt a bit hopeful to have found a
monk residing not far from the palace. No doubt the king
would be furious if he knew that a monk resides in a
monastery knowingly disregarding the king's disease
and didn’t even bother to query it let alone cure the
mysterious disease. She knew the king will not hesitate

to swing his sword on the monk's neck. If the king ends

14


--- Page 6 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

up thrashing the last hopeful option all glimmering hope
would be lost. So, the queen hatched a plan and
contacted the servant without discussing it with the king.
The servant also happens to visit the monastery and
oftentimes helped the monk. The queen secretly made
the pledge to the servant, to help her cure king’s

mysterious disease.

The servant approached the monk and initially he
refused to treat the king. He posited that the mad king
has killed a lot of innocent people and driven out families
out of the country and he wants no part of the unfolding

events.

The servant fervently pleaded to the monk, “I have
served you for a very long time and never have |
disobeyed your orders. I've never asked for anything in
return. Guru for the goodwill of all living beings in the
kingdom please endow me with the king's treatment. |
would gladly trade my labour for the king's recovery from
this weird and horrible disease. | know you have a great

heart, please don't let me go empty handed.”

15


--- Page 7 ---

Bapru Marma

Seeing the fervent pledge of the servant the monk
agreed to do the treatment but with some conditions.
The monk told her that the king had to come to this
mountain alone and all weaponry including the king’s
rich garments should be left behind and enter the
monastery barefoot. He is only allowed to wear ordinary

dresses like a commoner!

The monk pointed fingers towards the horizon and
cautioned her, “This is the boundary line of the

mountain. No one should enter the boundary except the

king.”

The servant went back to the palace with the monk's

condition.

Upon hearing everything from the servant the queen
started to panic. She pondered whether the king would
pay heed to the monk's condition of entrance. The
queen decided to wait for the opportune moment. After a
fortnight when the season changed the disease popped
its ugly head again. The king moaned in a severe
headache. The Queen didn't hesitate to seize the
opportune moment to elaborate on the findings of the
servant. The king immediately told her to summon the

16


--- Page 8 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

monk. As soon as she laid out the monk’s condition of
entry to the mountain the king anguished in anger. But
the pain he was suffering was far too much to bear!
Reality took hold of his logic and he relented. He agreed

to accept the monk's condition.

The following day he marched towards the mountain
with his cavalry accompanied by the queen and the

servant.

As they reached the boundary line, she stopped the

cavalcade.

She yelled at the top of her lungs, “Everyone stop. No
one is allowed to travel beyond this point. The king must

travel alone from here on.”

The king reluctantly nodded. He started to climb the
steps.

The queen and the servant stayed behind setting up the
tents at the foothills of the great mountain. The chief of
the troop waited outside the king's tent. The king started
to climb the steep windy stair to the top. As he got closer
to the top the king was panting from climbing so high.
His feet started to bleed, knee started to swell and

17


--- Page 9 ---

Bapru Marma

inflame and his thirst was killing him. He could hardly
contain his anger. He thought to himself how dare a
commoner like the monk could do this to a king and he
promised himself that once he reaches the top, he'll
make sure to perform the cruellest act he could conjure
up so that the monk never ever even remotely dare to

think such a thing.

But he forgot all of those cursing and cussing as he saw
the monk in meditation. He was awestricken to see the
serenity spread across the monk's face. He couldn’t
fathom how old the monk might have been. He only saw
a fearless great saint. The king lost his chain of
thoughts. The monk handed the king a goblet with
water. He gobbled up the water in seconds. The water
tasted nothing like he has ever tasted in his royal
palace. A clear and pristine goblet of water grinded his
anger to a halt! He felt energetic again.

Eyes closed, the old monk spoke in slow motion, “Listen

to everything that | will confer upon you.”

He continued his speech, “Listen carefully and let me
finish what | have to say, steady your breathing and
keep your eyes shut.”

18


--- Page 10 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

The king nodded in unison. The monk touched his
forehead. After several minutes he opened his eyes.
The king's eyes were still closed.

The monk continued his speech touching the king's
forehead, “This is not a disease rather a karma for your
sin from previous life. Your judgement from previous life

is still pending. Let me explain.”

A long long time ago. There was a kingdom in the north.
Back then you were born as a dog. A girl named Nirong
lived in a village. Even though she was a commoner,
she was exquisitely beautiful. Though Everyone praised
her beauty nobody dared to divulge it in front of her. One
day when you were being driven out of the palace you
became very thirsty. You went to a nearby river to drink.
At that exact moment the most exquisite beautiful girl of
the village went to fetch water as well. You became
enamoured with her beauty. You followed her after
drinking water. After filling her chalice as she headed
towards house you also followed her and sought to stay
at her place. She didn’t even know that you were
mesmerized by her beauty. She was very kind and her

19


--- Page 11 ---

Bapru Marma

kind heartedness towards all living beings knew no
bounds, Since then, you followed her everywhere she
went, And sho also liked you and started to feed you.
Whenever sho went to fotch water, you followed her as if
you were her shadow, When she went to fetch woods,
you followed her, When she went to the market you
stayed close to her. When she went to social events you
attached yourself with her. When she lied-down In barns
you would also wag your talls in her face. Initially
nobody raised any questions. But as time went on
people started to question why she was not getting
married as she Inched towards adulthood day by day.
People spread rumour around the village that she
doesn't like anyone but the dog. Eligible bachelors
wanted her to marry them and be their bride. They
started to spread rumours that she had already wed the
dog hence no urgency. The story spread like fire from
one end of the village to the other. People started to
belleve the story. At the beginning she didn't pay heed
to the rumours. She knew that all the boys in the village
wanted her secretly. They are Just spreading rumours
out of sheer frustration and desperation to get close to
her, She continued to do her everyday chores as usual.
But as the rumour spread like wildfire the elders in the

20


--- Page 12 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

village including the children started to question, “How
beauty has blinded her? Didn’t she see that it was a

dog?”

She was really caught off-guard with juicy stories and
became extremely frustrated. She took you to the place
where she found you in the first place. But no luck. You
found your way back to her house in the dead of night. A

precarious situation hung around her.

She thought to herself what if she left you somewhere
far away from this village. It would definitely make things
harder for the dog. As planned, she started to follow a
hard-to-remember obscure terrain behind the mountain
away from the village. But you were clever enough to
apprehend that she was trying to get rid of you. You
showed your cleverness by marking the route with urine
so that you can get back using smell. That day she left
you deep in the forest undergrowth but sniffing urine you
were back to the house the next day. With a heightened
fervour the villagers started to fan out the rumours. The
villagers started to call her “Dog’s wife”. Whenever she
went the people yelled at her “Dog's wife”. Defamation
badly hurt her. Anger consumed her. Out of sheer

frustration she yelled at you to the top of her lungs.

21


--- Page 13 ---

Bapru Marma

Being a dog, you didn't bother. One morning she fed you
very caringly and you forgot everything. After cuddling
for a few moments, you were led to the top of the
mountain. As she perched on a cliff you ran straight to
her for a cuddly hug and when you jumped straight for a
hug instead suddenly, she stepped aside and you
plunged headfirst onto rocky outcrop far below. You
tumbled all the way down to the bottom. Tears ran
across her cheeks as this was against anything she
planned. But that was the best way to get rid of you.
Since the day nobody has ever visited the place.

Many years have passed since then. Your soul was

captured by a tree spirit and thus remain seized by the

22


--- Page 14 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

spirit for yoars, Whenever the spirit plays with your soul
you have a severe headache. As years passed, you
were reborn as a human being but your soul remains
entrapped by the tree spirit.

The king was listening to the story In utter silence. When
the story ended, he was as astounded as anyone In the
room and stood speechless. A haunted soul from the
past life! What Is the solution? Where Is that tree? How
could he redeem his past sins? Thousands of questions
clouded his mind.

Instead of sobbing, defiance took hold of him and he
demanded authoritatively, “You must find a way-out
monk! You must stop it anyhow. Or your time Is
numbered on the earth! “

His altered demeanour sent chills down the spines,
Defying the command would result In ominous outcome.
Silence took hold as nobody replied to king’s demand.

Then after a while monk replied, "Don't worry my king. |
am a monk. My duty bounds with healing the sufferers
with proper guidance. | will follow my duty.”

23


--- Page 15 ---

(ne ey a

Bapru Marma

The monk started to descend to the foothill of the
mountain. The king followed in silence. The queen came
out of her tent with servants. The captain and troops
stood immobile. King explained everything to the queen.
He then requested her to return to the castle. She
agreed solemnly and readied servants for the return
journey. Only the captain remained with the king.

They started their journey north with the monk leading.

The monk advised the king, “If we come across a river,
lake or pond on our way don't spit, dishonour or defame
anything / anyone under any circumstances. You’ve

been forewarned!”

The king nodded agreeably and started to walk. The
journey became long and arduous seemingly with no
ends in sight. The king completely lost track of time as
they travelled under the forest canopy for several days
and nights straight. He was tired, weak, hungry, and
extremely exhausted. And he forgot the monk’s
rudimentary advice. When the sight of crystal-clear
pristine river rose above the horizon with an invitation to
indulge in its calm water, the king ran straight to the river
bank. But the river had a strong undercurrent turbulence

24


--- Page 16 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

with quicksand, Monk's forbidden advice was completely
ignored. They needed to cross the river, On king's
Instruction the captain bullt a small raft out of timber
woods and bamboo. They floated the raft across the
river, Relleved momentarily the king started to chew his
favourite betel leaves as they crossed the river, He
forgot monk's forewarning and spat on the river, The
reddish saliva percolated through the turbulent torrent all
the way to the bottom. The river was ruled by a water
splrit king. At the time the water spirit king's one and
only daughter was knitting at the bottom of the river. The
reddened saliva reached the bottom and reddened the
fibre she was knitting. She was mesmerized by the
scarlet colour and odour. She wanted more of the

crimson colour!

She ran as fast as she could to her father. Her father
was busy but as soon as he saw her, he raised his two

hands to embrace her.

He pitched In an elevated excited tone, “How is my
favourite daughter doing today? Why do you run so
fast?”

He embraced his daughter with warmth and love.

25


--- Page 17 ---

Bapru Marina

His daughter cooed under his heavy breath, “See father!
How bright and sparkling the colour is!) How sweet
smelling the marooned spot on the fabric is! Someone
who has such a nice colour god knows how beautiful he
might bel | want this person In my life under any
circumstances, | want this person as my pet!”

She was the only daughter of the underworld water
splrit. So, ignorance was unimaginable. He can’t really
ignore the request,

Solemnly he declared, “You are my only child. | have
never falled you so far and as always, | will also not let
this request be wasted. Consider your request as my
command! | will send the best soldiers In the kingdom to
find your pet and present in front of you.”

She started to dance in merriment. Then suddenly
ashamed of her dance she stopped and ran to her
knitting machine. By that time the monk, the king and
the captaln were getting very close to the bank. They
could see the silhouette of the glant tree on top of the
mountain from afar,

The monk pointed his finger and quivered in excitement,
“Can you see that?"

26


--- Page 18 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

The king's eyes glittered in anticipation.

“It's time you alleviate the malignant headache”, The

monk proclaimed.

They hurried towards the foothill of the mountain. There
was a ridge on the southside of the mountain which led
to a narrow passage going straight to the top of the
mountain. A treehouse a little further up the road was
visible. The king was surprised to find people living in
this deeply forested part of the mountain. They started to
climb the uphill road. The road ended in front of a
capacious house. No sooner had he entered the house,
king was lost in the maze and couldn’t find his way
around. He started to yell at the top of his lungs. After a
very long time of yelling and cacophonic gibberish they
saw an extremely exquisite women coming to the house

with woods on her back. She wasn’t happy to see them.

She demanded, “who are you? Why are you here? What

do you want?”

They stopped.

27


--- Page 19 ---

Bapru Marma

They muttered almost in a hushed tone, “We seek no
harm. We want to reach the top of the mountain. If you
would kindly show us the path.”

Apparently, she was hesitant and thought they must be
after the mountain and wanted to harm the mother
mountain or the giant tree that sheltered her house from

storms, winds and rockfalls.
She was furious, “No you can't go there!”

The monk stepped forward, “Dear sweet lady, we come
from a land far far away. The forest ground floors are
infested with nefarious creatures, ghouls, witches and
what not. Our friend here has been suffering from a
disease whose recuperation solely hinges on reaching
the mountain top. We are in dire need of assistance. Our
salvation would be achieved once we: reach the giant
tree. No harm will come to you or the giant tree or

mother mountain.”
Without a haste she went quiet for a while, pondering.

Then she inquired, “What do you want? Where do you

come from?”

The monk explained the purpose of their travel.

28


--- Page 20 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

Afterwards she seemed appeased, “It is too late now to
climb. You can start tomorrow morning.”

Lights didn’t penetrate the vast expanse of the forests as
such most of the forest remained dark and gloomy even
at daytime. A proper counselling on navigation was
obligatory to avoid disorientation in the jungle and find
one’s way around. It was getting dark so the women
allowed them to stay for the night. She prepared rice
and dried bamboo shoots for dinner. After the delicious
meal the king was so happy, he took off one of his

diamond rings from a forefinger and offered it to her.

Promptly she refused. “The mountain is like a gold to
me. The fields and paddocks around my place are the
best gifts. | have a few cows and pigs in the barn. | get
plentiful milk and meat from the farm. | need no gifts
from anyone. | am really sorry but | ought to decline your

offer.”

Surprised, the king seemed lost for a moment for the
refusal by a common folk on lucrative offerings of

ostentatious gifts.

29


--- Page 21 ---

Bapru Marma

When he regained his speech, he said, “Nobody ha
dared to deny my gift so far. May | have the honour ¢
knowing the name of our kind hosts?”

She uttered in a melancholic tone, “People call m

Nirong.”

The king was shocked a second time. This is the firs
time he heard her name. They forgot to ask her name
What a shame! The king became a bit edgy. He starec
at her as if he had never seen any human being.

Her face! Her eyes! They were exquisitely beautiful. A
magical ambience prevailed as she ambled around the
house. Mistaking her as an angelic being descending
from heaven would not be far off from reality!

She was an earthly woman and as down-to-earth as one

can be.
The king murmured, “Nirong!?”

The king started to speak, “Nirong, did you know why an
aristocrat powerful king such as me suffers like this?
Why | had to leave behind my kingdom, society and
travel such a remote corner to seek shelter to you?”

Nirong stared at him, expressionless.

30


--- Page 22 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

"That is the mystery. The root cause of the disease is
because of you!”, king’s accusation echoed around the

room.

She was dumbfounded, “Because of me? What did | do?

| shouldn't have let you guys’ in to my house.”

She alleged angrily. Letting strangers in her house
seemed the best idea at that time now it seems it

couldn’t have been more wrong!

Monk delivered whole story to her leaving nothing
behind. The reason for his headache! Why has he
travelled so far away from home! Who she was? When

and how they'd met in past life.

After hearing the stories about her previous lives, she

couldn't believe what she heard.

Agape she only offered, “You should rest. Your salvation

awaits.”

The weather took a worse turn the following morning. All
three of them wanted to climb the mountain. But Nirong
forbade them from climbing. It was dangerous to wander
around the mountain ridges, slippery dirt roads, and
sloping grounds. The slippery roads posed the biggest

31


--- Page 23 ---

Bapru Marma

threat. One misstep and one might be on their way down
to bottom foothills festooned with ragged edges,
protruding boulders, and rocks as hard as steel. Lucks
won't favour anyone hitting the ground. The rain lasted
for a week. For the whole week she cooked and fed
them with utmost care and love. In the back of her mind,
she tried to reminisce her stories from past lives but
nothing came into her mind.

After a week’s thunderstorm and deluge when the first
morning ray beamed across the mountain range they
could wait no longer. She led the way up the mountain.
After a staggering half a day's journey at last she
stopped underneath the giant tree. Top of the tree
couldn't be seen. It was so high up in the sky the tree
seemed to have vanished in the sky. No wonder they
are locally called “Heaven’s Tree”. The tree was infested
with algae, moss and mildew. Making the slippery

climbing harder.

32


--- Page 24 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

None had any idea as to how to retrieve the soul.

Legend was it that the souls were kept in a rucksack
carried by wandering enchantress. People often has
seen her sitting by the bottom of the river. Toying with
souls entrapped in her rucksack was her favourite
pastime. The villagers oftentimes skipped that part of the
forest during times of hunting and __ foraging.
Enchantresses’ laughter echoed across the forests.
Legend says she would entice young man_ into
surrendering to her love-laced magic and subdue men.
As she annexed their souls into the sack they would

want to become subservient to her.

As they neared the bottom of the mountain and closer to

the river, her giggle became louder and prominent.

33


--- Page 25 ---

Bapru Marma

“You seem very happy sister.”, Nirong asked. At that
enchantress stopped and looked straight back at them
with cavernous haggard face without any laughter.

“So, you think | didn’t know you were coming? | can hear
sounds from miles away”, She bared her canine sharp
teeth. In her darkish eyeballs a glint of black swirl was
prominent. Long hair waving in the air weaving a

sinuous dark aura around the place.

“You shouldn't have come. Little magic of yours doesn’t
work in this arena. | am immune to your incantation of
subjugation!”

“| don’t want to be on your bad side! | just want
something for my friend that you possess. Impossible
and hard it maybe but you have to let go of the

possession.”, Nirong’s commanding voice boomed
across the prairie. Startling even the monk as he stared

at Nirong.

“And what that might be?”, enchantress’s harsh voice

echoed.

“Soul of our king!”

34


--- Page 26 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

“A soul of a king? That might be not only precious but a
pricey one. How about a soul of another of your friend?

Something for something.” She hissed.

“It doesn’t have to be this way. We seek no harm. Give

us what we want”, Nirong pleaded.

“Or better else | will capture your friend’s soul and yours
too.”, she cackled in amusement. At that a few strands
of her hair dug into the grounds and weaved through
grounds. A crackling of sound diffused across the river
and mountains. Earth started to shake and teetered the
boulders at the top of the mountain. The strands of hair
picked up the boulder and hurl it towards Nirong. She
muttered her incantation. The boulder stopped short of a

few inches from her face and vaporized into thin air.

“Hmm! the incantation of mooring!”, enchantress hissed,
“Works every time. While you were busy with
incantation. Rest of strands should be busy in wrapping
you in loving tight grip around you like that.” Chortling
she flicked her fingers left. Nirong was hurled towards a
jagged rock face headfirst.

But as she was hurtling through air, she used the
strands of hair to also drag enchantress along.

35


--- Page 27 ---

Bapru Marma

Surprised enchantress tumbled across the barren rocky

ground.

“You are predictable enchantress. The fruitless attempt
just squandered my time.”, She pivoted her feet on the
ground. Lassoing the rope around her neck she uttered
the incantation of trammel. In a flash strands of hair
cocooned enchantress in death grip. She fell headfirst
into the rocky ground reddening her cheek in gore
scarlet. Confounded she stood head down and

downtrodden.

Nirong eyed her. Enchantress struggled through the
tight hair around the mouth but uttered, “you’ve always
bested me. There is no exception this time as well. | will
grant your wish under one condition as you know
something can only be replaced if an alternate
arrangement is made as upkeep of balance, is a must.”

“And what that might be?”

“Very simple. | will release his souls from sack in return
he only needs to comply with a requirement that is he
ought not look reverse until his journey is complete.”
Enchantress declared.

36


--- Page 28 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

Looking back at monk, the captain and the king, Nirong
nodded, All three nodded In unison,

Somewhere distant a howling echoed through the valley.
Howling turned Into deafening shrieks. A shadowy figure
crouched back and forth. Then retreated into a cave
leaving nothing but a twirl of winds nudging tree leaves.
Handing over the soul to the monk Enchantress flicked
her finger and vanished. They descended the mountain.
Everyone walked silently. Nobody noticed the teary eyes
and droplets of tears rolling down from Nirong’s eyes.

Once they reached the hut, they washed themselves
and she served light refreshments. As the farewell
neared Nirong gestured king for a private talk and went
outside the house to have few words. A giant tamarind
tree shaded the whole locale pasting it the aura of

centrepiece.

King asked first. “Why did you bring me here? Do you
have something to say?”

She interjected. “Dark magic of the mountain hangs
around here everywhere. Don't look back to this
property until you reach the farthest extremities of the
land,”

37


--- Page 29 ---

Bapru Marma

The captain appeared at the door. “My king, it’s getting
late. We ought to leave now before long it is too dark.”

Both of them stood up from their seats. After the farewell

she went back inside. The whole mountain felt darker
and gloomier from grief. No singing birds, no
murmurings of winds, no swaying of trees, no squeaking
of animal from the barn. A dead silence infested
everywhere. The king and the captain followed the monk
on their way down the mountain. Once they reached the
foothill they doubled down on their gait. It was getting
dark. Fagged and fatigued they stopped short of the
roaring river they crossed previously. They planned to

38


--- Page 30 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

build a tent to rest. Crossing the river at this late hour of
the evening won't be a wise decision. The solider started
to set up the tent for the night next to the river. Scattered
woods on the forest floor were used to make torches. He
made a bonfire out of dry leaves and woods nearby.
After finishing dinner everyone wanted to go to bed. The
monk went to bed as soon as he finished dinner. The
King went to wash himself in the river with captain by his
side. King forgot Nirong’s advice not to look back. As
soon as he glanced back towards the tent a big wave of
water splashed onto the bank and wrapped him around
and swallowed him whole dragging him towards the
bottom of the river. The skirmish went on for a while.
King tried to free himself but to no avail. Immediately he
realized he should’ve paid heed to advice. But it was too
late now. The captain came running with a torch in his
hand. King was already half drowned from his waist
below and fighting to free himself with the turbulent
wave. The captain grabbed king’s hand and tried to pull
him out of water. Something else much stronger and
powerful was dragging him down inch by inch, moment

by moment.

39


--- Page 31 ---

Bapru Marma

Exhausted king knew his fate was sealed and stopped
fighting waves instead he gestured captain to get close
to him, “Just as my fate has brought me to Nirong so as
my fate has brought me here. Trying harder won't
change the course of fate. Let me go through with my

destiny.”

He took off his ring from his forefinger and handed it to

the captain.

“Take the ring. Give it to your queen. Tell her, fate has
taken the king. Also tell her to get married to someone
whose finger can be fitted properly into the ring. Accept
him as legitimate ruler of the kingdom and seat him in

the throne.”

The king was swallowed by a big swirling wave
instantaneously. Down under the current the water spirit
king was waiting for him. The black magic couldn't
overpower until king glanced back to where he came
from. As soon as the king forgot the advice and glanced
back towards the tent, the black magic overpowered
him. Down in the underworld realm the news spread
quick and fast. The message of the pet's capture for
underworld king’s daughter spread like wildfires. The

40


--- Page 32 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

news feverberated from one end to the other in the
underground kingdom, Every musical instrument
imaginable were brought out to play for the festivities,
King couldn't understand the reasons for dins and
bustles. He started to get a sense of cacophony when
the water spirit king's daughter appeared with a cage in
tront. He was brought there not to be murdered but to be
kept as a pet.

She whispered In his ear, “The first time | saw your
reddened droplets | was in love. Now | can rest my
wandering mind. You aren't angry with me? Are you?”

Water spirit king’s daughter looked like an angelic
avatar. She was exquisitely beautiful through and
through. She wore a scarlet overall festooned with teal-
coloured braids. Nobody can deny her beauty. Afraid to
upset the whole ceremonial arrangement reluctantly the
king went along. He decided to go with the ceremonial
duties out of fear of retaliation.

So, he replied, “You are the most beautiful girl | have
ever seen, Nobody could deny your beauty. | am
blissfully blessed to be your pet.”

41


--- Page 33 ---

Bapru Marma

Trumpets went off marking kings’ consent. And before
sunrise he was transformed into a dog. The heart
broken king carried on with his newly minted live in

underworld.

After losing the king to the lake, the monk and the
captain ran as fast as they could to reach the kingdom.
The monk went straight to his lair. The captain carried
on foot towards the palace. He explained to queen every
bit of the events that took place leaving nothing out. She
knew it would be unimaginable to get back her husband.

The captain held the ring that he received from king and

passed it to the queen.

He explained king’s last wishes verbatim, “When king
offered the ring to me, he ordered me to carry it to you.
His instruction was for you to get married to someone

who can wear the ring.”

The queen bade farewell to the soldier. The queen cried
all through the day and all through the night for weeks.
At last, she conceded in carrying out king's dying wish to
get married. One day early in the morning she

42


--- Page 34 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

summoned all of the citizens in the country and
explained king’s dying wish to them. Hoping to get hold
of aristocracy and wealth the men in the kingdom lined
up defying the scorching summer heat. Overwhelmed
with sheer enthusiasm she was in quandary. One by
one hopeful grooms crammed in front of the castle court
yard to try their luck. But hopes of finding the right suitor
became slim by the hours. It was already past noon
since dawn and no one has been fortunate. On second
day she sent the rings around the country and still no
luck! The captain kept to himself during the whole
ordeal. Suddenly it occurred to her that the captain has
not tried the ring himself for once! She held the ring in
his face. The sight of ring frightened the captain.

He protested. She gestured, “That's an order.”

He reluctantly tried to fit the ring. Lo and behold it fitted
straight into his middle finger!

The queen was stunned and stared at him speechless
for a few moments. The captain lowered his gaze onto
the floor. She told him to summon everyone in the
kingdom to spread the news. At her order the
messengers were sent far and wide across the kingdom

43


--- Page 35 ---

Bapru Marma

and invited everyone to the palace. The next day when
everyone was present at the palace the queen
presented herself in a beautiful patrician gown. The

captain inched closer to her.

The queen announced in her quivering voice, “Dear
lords, ladies and citizens thank you all for coming to the
palace in a short notice. | really appreciate your
presence. You are aware that your dear king along with
the monk and the captain set out to find a cure for his
illness in a land far away. But to our dismay he has been
unable to return from the long, arduous and dangerous
journey. Before he took his last breath, he asked the
captain to take this ring as a good omen and told me to
find a suitor who can fit the ring in his finger. You are
also aware that | have sent the rings from one end to the
other end to find a suitor and all my efforts has resulted
in fruitless expedition. Last night in my despair to find a
suitor as a last-ditch approach | asked the captain to
wear the ring. Lo and behold suddenly | found my suitor

standing in front of me.”

At that she paused for a moment.


--- Page 36 ---

Tales from Marma Folklore

“All these times | was wondering what happened to the
king. Why two of the men are back and king hasn't
returned. Unharmed. Do you know why he hasn't
returned? Because of him”, She raised her finger
pointing captain, “He has murdered the king and
retrieved a ring that only fit his finger. Now you tell me
what punishment should be appropriate for a

treacherous act like this?”

Queen’s speech dumbfounded the captain. He couldn't
apprehend what she was talking about. But there was
little he could do anything about it now. Fueled by the
lies and fake accusations the angry mob was agitated
and they started to protest in unison against the queen!

At last disgusted commoner raised their voice unison,
“Murderous queen. Imprison her. Throw her in the

dungeon.”

Crowds surprise counter reaction shocked the queen.
She stepped back for the surprise encounter and
outcome. She ran for the horse she had been riding as a
queen. The fastest in the kingdom. But even the fastest

horse needs to stop to recharge and refuel. So, she was

45


--- Page 37 ---

Bapru Marma

eventually captured after few days of chasing and

imprisoned for life.

And that’s how the inevitable fall of the cruellest

kingdom took place.

The Ugly Frog

There was once a wretchedly poor couple. They bore no
children. They always longed for a child. Unfortunately,
luck wasn't on their side. Desperate finding no alternate
ways the poor old man started to treat a giant non-

human creature, frog, as his own son.

The old man used to work at the king's palace. One day
the king having mercy on the old wretched man
summoned him into the palatial court. He wanted to
endow him with a year worth of salary. But the old man
was worried that the king might want to punish him and
instead asked his son, the burrowing frog, to attend to

king’s summon.

Seeing the ugly frog disgusted king.

46
