

--- Page 1 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

THE STORY OF CLEVER MAN

The Entrapment

Once upon a time there lived a young man. He loved
roaming around in forests, mountains and savannahs.
One day on his venture suddenly he heard a big bang,
and yelling, a sound more akin to a cry for help. He
started to forage in the jungle for the source of the sound.
He followed the sound to its source. The sound was
emanating from a cave at the foothill of a mountain.
There was a big dried up well where a man, a tiger, a
monkey and a snake seemed stuck at the bottom.
Desperate to climb the well they tried their hardest but
resulted in futile cacophony. As the towering figure of the
young man loomed over the well, they started to yell at
the top of their lungs in unison.

Sobbing through tears the tiger yelled, ‘O dear kind
hearted man please help me. Save my life. You have my
word if you save my life, | will be indebted to you for life.’

Helpless tiger’s earnest pleading invoked kindness in
him. He wanted to help the tiger regardless of whether it
kept words or not. With all his might he pulled the tiger
out of the well. As the tiger was freed it leapt to its feet
on the ground.

Apparently gasping, the tiger told him, ‘You saved my
life. My life is indebted to you for life. If you ever need me,
just shout out my name ‘The King of the Forest’. | give
my word that | will try everything in my power to help you.
But just one piece of wise advice even if you help animals
never ever help a human being!’

13


--- Page 2 ---

Bapru Marma

And then the tiger left. That struck a bit strange to him:
Why not help a human being as he himself is a human

being!

No sooner had the tiger left the monkey started to cry out
loud, ‘My dear kind hearted man. You dared to rescue a
dangerous being such as a tiger! Wouldn’t you be kind
enough to rescue a monkey in peril! Please help me!
Rescue me dear man! | will be indebted to you forever!
And when in need | will also help you.’

As soon as the monkey landed on the ground, he
thanked Alingbo the clever in gratitude and advised him,
‘O kind-hearted human though you show mercy to the
most annoying creatures, never do the same to human
beings. For they are the worst!’

These animals don’t have any gratitude! For all his hard
works and efforts these animals don’t seem to care
about human being even though he himself is one of
them! Rather they are advising not to help human being.
Same as tigers and monkeys before, the snake also
started to plead to him. He also freed the snake.

During departure the snake advised him, ‘No matter what
you do, never ever help the two-legged creature that is
human being!

The snake wriggled through the forest floor towards a
deeper part of the forest. Whole incident confused him
profoundly. Most dangerous animals in the forests have
advised him against helping a human being! All the while
they knew he was also a human being!

In the meantime, the human being started to yell, ‘O kind
hearted Alingbo. You have shown mercy to the most

14


--- Page 3 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

venomous, dangerous and ferocious animals but
wouldn't you care to save a fallow human being bound
by blood from the same race. Please save me o kind
hearted Alingbo. | will be forever indebted to you with
life,’

Just like before he also proceeded to free the man. The
man thanked him profusely and left him promising that
no matter what his circumstances would be, he will be
around for his aid, if needed. Many years have passed
since then, after a very long time one day when he went
for a stroll, he came across a school of monkeys playing
in tree branches that reminded him about the monkey
that he saved a long time ago. He started to follow the
monkeys and at last reached their den. As he was looking
for the monkey, it suddenly appeared in front of him out
of nowhere.

The monkey seemed extremely happy, ‘Dear Alingbo it is
my honour to meet you again. Just wait for a minute.’

And then the monkey disappeared into the jungle. The
monkey jumped from tree-to-tree foraging fruits. After a
while it turned up with handful of bananas, jackfruits,
coconuts, guavas and what not! The most astonishing
part? All of the fruits came from the farmland nearby the
monkey looked after himself! He was hungry from
walking through the forests floor all day. He devoured the
fresh juicy fruits and when he was done, he burped.
Monkey was more than happy to see him belch. He felt
a bit ashamed to have belched in front of the monkey's
family. Gratified he took leave.

After the monkey, he went to see the tiger. The tiger was
also extremely delighted to see him. Tiger laid down a

15


--- Page 4 ---

Bapru Marma

piece of leather and gestured him to sit down. He told
him not to arrange any feast and gestured towards his
full tummy. At that the tiger laughed. He asked him to be
seated and went inside. For a very long time he seemed
to have gone. He started to worry whether the tiger forgot
about him as he waited outside. After what seemed to be
an eternal day, the tiger emerged from his den with a
golden necklace in his hand.

‘| have nothing to offer you. This is the only thing | can
offer you my dear Alingbo. | found the necklace when |
was foraging in the deepest part of the black forest. One
of the links in the necklace is broken. Maybe you can
reuse it after repairing in a jeweller’s store?’

He couldn’t say no to his earnest begging. Accepting the
necklace, he took leave of the tiger. After that he went to
see the man that he saved. He beamed as he saw him.

‘Dear Alingbo, my saviour, please come this way’, he laid
down a soft mattress on the floor.

Bowls full of fruit, juice made from fresh fruits from
farmland, meat from wild boar were served in honour of
him. They talked about their respective ventures,
hobbies, bushcraft skills, wild adventures and what not!
At the end, he produced the broken golden necklace in
his palm.

With a mouth full of fruits, he enquired, ‘My dear friend,
where can | take this jewellery to repair? Any jeweller you
know that does repair broken necklace in the town?’

The man took the necklace and slided it across from left
palm to right palm. Sunlight glinted off the necklace. The
shimmering sparkle brightened up the darkest corner of

16


--- Page 5 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

the room and he knew the owner has to be someone who
is not a commoner. An extravagant piece of golden
jewellery. The owner must've been of highborn. He had
heard about a missing golden necklace from castle’s
wardrobe and a reward is being offered to apprehend the
thief. Warily without raising suspicion he thought Alingbo
the Clever must be the thief who is imposing as a
gentleman! But he didn’t say anything.

Forcing a smile he told him, ‘Why not? | know not only
someone but the very best! Leave this necklace with me.
| will get it fixed within two days! Don’t worry about the
repair cost. You’ve saved my life I'm indebted to you. Let
me at least return the favour by bearing the repair cost.’

Alingbo the clever was extremely happy to see the man.
He turned out to be a truly man of words. He promised
return it in two days.

As soon as he left house, the man scurried towards the
castle. Immediately he requested for an audience with
king in the dead of night. The bounty prize was pretty
high! An acreage land out in the west with servants,
butlers, footmen, houseman, maid and what not! His life
would be set for life!

Showing the necklace to the king he accused, ‘There is
this man who gave me this necklace. No sooner had he
submitted | knew from the glazing that this jewellery
must’ve been worn by our princess.’

As the king held the necklace up close, straight away it
was apparent that emblazoned diamond necklace was
his daughter's. It was the necklace she lost when she
was scouting the black forests for wild games.

17


--- Page 6 ---

Bapru Marma

Caldness in his voice boomed around the room, ‘Tell me
how did you obtain this necklace?’

The man squirmed and chuckled, ‘Forgive me my king! |
found the chain from Alingbo the clever, He came to me
to repair the broken chain. As soon as | saw it, | knew
straight away this was our beloved princess’s necklace
which has been lost in the jungle for a fortnight!’

King ordered the arrests of the so-called Alingbo the
clever immediately, He was arrested by the guards from
the hotel he was staying and immediately thrown into
prison. During the commotion he was trying to make
sense of all the hullaballoo surrounding him but alas not
asingle soul informed him the cause of the arrests. It was
during his transfer to the farthest corner of the dungeon
that he comprehended true nature of the imprisonment.
He has been charged with treason for killing the princes
and robbing princess of her golden necklace! A trial day
will be set where he will be summoned in front of the
commoners and sentenced!

The Friends

Tiger was excited to meet with the Alingbo the clever and
he shared his excitement with snake. Hearing what tiger
and monkey has proffered upon their chance encounter
snake wanted to do the same, So, he set out to seek his
saviour, When he came upon the town all he heard
people talking was about how a savage brutal man
named Alingbo the clever was imprisoned and how he
Killed the princess and looted her of expensive
Jewelleries,

18


--- Page 7 ---

More Tales from Marma lolklore

Aghast secretly snake slithered down the meandering
corridors of the castle and met with the Alingbo the
clever. ‘Don't worry my dear Alingbo the clever. | will set
out immediately for the princess and try to locate her. In
the meantime, do you want me to liberate you from the
dungeon?’

Alingbo the clever replied, ‘I’m honoured for your
generous proffer. But | will wait for your findings and
news. But you have to hurry up the trials in a week’s
time!’

Snake took leave. The tiger and monkey accompanied
the snake in the scouting. They foraged through the
deepest part of the forests, steepest glades in the
mountain, rocky outcrop of the woodlands. The snake
searched the ground crevices, tiger used his sensory
organs to sniff out likely whereabouts and monkey
bobbed from tree to tree scanning the skyline and ridges
from one extreme to the other.

a9


--- Page 8 ---

Bapru Marma

At last, on seventh day, they found the princess
imprisoned at the bottom of a cavernous abyss locked
up, tied and gagged with ropes. As they descended into
the abyss she flinched and recoiled backwards. The
snake reassured her and divulged their mission. She told
them she has been imprisoned by a witch. The witch
practiced black magic and has captured her as she
wants to morph and mirror her current stature. Tiger tried
to set her free but the more he tried to slacken the knots
the tighter it wrapped around her wrists. Squirming in
agony she nodded left and right. She told them they had
to come up with antidote that only the witch possessed
in her ‘Clandestine Chamber’. A decoction of herbs of
youth that will exude effervescent concoction,

20


--- Page 9 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

consumption of which will release elements pertinent for
the immediate release of knots.

Dying sun was casting its final glow in the horizon when
rustle on leaves alerted the trios that the witch is nearby.
Her albino posture was ordained with turquoise coveralls
and dark brown trug tugged on left elbow. Whistling she
perched the basket on a table and scurried towards edge
of the abyss. Seeing princess at the abyss she felt
satisfied and a smile spread across her face. In a
fortnight when the moon is high up in the cerulean sky,
she plans to morph her physique into princess’s
silhouette. From there on her ploy to secure princess’s
stature, form and status will come true and pave the way
for relishing all the perks in the world. She felt ecstatic.
The trios were hiding behind a trap door in the cave. As
night fell the witch snuffed out the torches and went into
bed. The moment they sensed that the witch was in
slumber they exited and hurried towards the jungle.

The Mage
There lived a mage at the edge of the forest, well versed
in the practice of transfiguration. Mage the dark liked
being left alone so that none can bother him during his
ventures, beyond earth and netherworld. He resided
within a caved rock wall. A brief lapse of moment that
one can intervene him was when he stepped out on
rocky outcrop to take plunge in crystal water fall far
below the caved wall. He relished bathing in rapids using
his incantation of dive. Spirited exultation was followed
by contemplation for fleeting passings. It is at this
passings of moment he endured intrusion by strangers
as a normalcy. On a sunny day when the mage indulged

21


--- Page 10 ---

Bapru Marma

himself in the pool the monkey hopped onto the tallest
tree as a lookout for intruders, the tiger patrolled arourrc
the periphery guarding and the snake waited in his
camouflage to nudge closer to the mage. As he emerged
from the rock pool and sat on the sandy beach snake
inched closer to him. The mage was levitating with
closed eyes and reciting unintelligible words. The rustling
sound of leaves titillated his ears and with the corner of
his eyes he saw a shadow move.

‘Who goes there?’, he rumbled.

22


--- Page 11 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

‘\tis |. |seek no harm rather | seek ald for wretched soul
who has been wronged and imprisoned for doing the
right thing’, the snake replied.

‘lalso hear other souls rustling nearby’, the mage replied,
eyes closed,

The tiger and the monkey emerged from their hiding
spot.

The snake explained the whole story of Alingbo the
clever how he helped them, how he was betrayed by a
fellow human being, what fate lies ahead for him before
the public court ordeal.

He pondered for a while then commended, ‘Alingbo the
clever must be freed for that | can help but old witch
needs defeating first. Her mage power lies in her cloak.
Every night after her nightly chores she takes off the
cloak and metamorphoses into a bat and leaves the hut
for a cave to hang upside down for sleeping. This is her
most vulnerable moments. Don’t think it would be easy
though. The cloak has its own mind and always tries to
get back to her. Once you get hold of the cloak you have
to tear it down into pieces and destroy it by lighting it
with fire along with her magical wand. She would
definitely find it very hard to fend off three angry animals
without her treasure! You have to be quick-witted and
unorthodox. Now leave me be and enjoy the scenic
beauty and be on your quest.’

The mage disappeared into the dense bushland after his
prophetic advice. Deciphering the mage’s witty assertion
seemed paradoxical. They spend a fortnight round the
Clock parleying merits of besting witch. The monkey
produced a rucksack and webbing and laid out his plans.

23


--- Page 12 ---

Bapru Marma

Nightfall seemed distant for them, especially for the
monkey. He was restless. The trio waited in the nearby
bush for the nightfall. Gloomy sky turned pitch black. The
witch took off her cloak after day’s chore and hung it in
a wooden closet next to the abyss before transmuting
into a bat. Soon afterwards she fell into a deep sleep and
her snoring reverberated and bounced off the wall. As
they inched closer, they could hear the fluttering sounds
of the cloak rolling sideways. Snake slowly plodded
around the wooden door knob and it creaked wide open.
The cloak seemed to have it’s own mind! Not realizing
what’s happening it stood upright. Monkey leapt and
tugged onto its ledge, tightening its grip. That didn’t
deter the cloak from choking monkey with its ornate silky
ledges. Tiger also leapt and bit the cloak’s top portion.
Bit by bit both sliced through the cloak until the very last
thread. The commotions aroused the witch and when
she realized that cloak was being torn apart into
piecemeal threads she lurched forward in a dazed state,
growled and bared her teeth. Slowly she drew the
magical wand that sparkled even in pitch dark. As she
pointed the wand towards them it stretched in length and
unfurled with a sharp horn on either side rapidly
advancing with fires in mouth. Tiger and monkey
prompted to left. The tip of the wand fired flames and
nearby dry barks set alight with fire. The chain like horned
head retracted and the witch smirked. The second sling
of the protracting chain whisked past snakes’ agile
acrobatic posture and kissed the gum tree and lit up the
nights on impact. With a swift movement on his toe the
monkey grabbed the springing chain but it continued to
drag the monkey as it protracted. Monkey tumbled and
rolled regardless with sheer drag marks on the ground
but it held onto iron wrought Chain wire and continued

24


--- Page 13 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

to pull apart at the joint. As tug, twitch, wrench got bolder
and bolder chain link frayed and frayed. While the witch
grappled to manoeuvre the chain, tiger leapt and bite her
hand. As if being shocked to the core with extreme
jerkiness tiger's limb became numb and paralysed. A
witch’s bite equals copious volumes of venomous
reptilian kisses. Her blood is ten times more potent than
her bite.

‘Glad you bit me. A little bit of advice never ever bite a
witch for you are doomed for the next several hours to
be immobile and stationary. Anyone else wants to try
biting me, anyone?’, her smirk turned into booming
cackle.

Monkey didn’t have the opportune moment to pay heed
to witch’s elucidatory notes. His teeth were already deep
in her forearm. Within a moment he tipped over to his
side stretching out his hands and legs and the brownish
raised hair on his back prickled up straight.

He had a draconian grab on her wrists, dug his teeth
deeper and deeper until he was stiff from neck down.
Much alike mummified statue monkey lay at the feet of
the witch. Hysterical smile spread across her face and
thrusted the chainwire in a circular motion wrapping
around the tiger’s front and hind leg. She cast a spell of
wondrous immobilization on the tiger and the chain
encircled the tiger up to neck obscuring his peripheral
view, Tied up in unbreakable chain altogether the trio
were thrown into the dungeons.

25


--- Page 14 ---

Bapru Marma

The Escape

Alingbo the clever was restless as days have passed
without progress. He sensed that something was not
right. Prodding soldiers, sentinels and passers-by and
fellow inmate prisoners for information he surmised he’d
hit a brick wall. On third day he saw a visitor come to visit
a fellow inmate. As he conversed with the visitor, he
claimed to have met the animals and felt sorry when he
became aware that poor creatures have failed in their
endeavours and unknown whereabouts.

He prodded ancient scroll of quietus. Tapping his wand
on four corners an incantation followed.

When he looked up, he had wry smile, ‘Dear Alingbo!
Your friends are locked up on a dungeon. Magical
strands were applied to bound and gag them. It is such
a powerful instrument that the harder they try the tighter
it becomes. The wizardry of dark forest was weaved into
the minute structure of the strand. Magic of yore are
engraved into it. And triumphing over the witch is the only
way to free them.’

At that the Alingbo’s face hardened. ‘All of this because
of greed! Someone too greedy to hurl forlorn fate. But if
truth be by my side, | shall defeat both the witch and the
greedy mortal. Would you aid me to triumph over the
wrongful?’

‘Aeon have passed since | have digressed my courses of
life. |! am on a journey of my own and don’t intend to
change my courses of life. A young mind such as yours
are prime for defeating a darkened soul.’

26


--- Page 15 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

‘To defeat such darkened souls, | have to break this
caged barrier first. | will only go out to right the wrongs.
Can you help me in the endeavours?’

‘If you say so | am more than willing participant for the
venture. All my life fighting for the underlings were sewn
into vein. | have fought for the weak all my life. Fighting
for your Cause will augment my life’s devotion. Now onto
the serious matter of defeating the witch. There’s a
potion that makes one invisible but guarded by largest
reptile named Naga. The magical potion strengthens one
momentarily and makes one invisible and untraceable.
Naga resides beside a giant lake on top of a mountain.
The forest down below manifests treacherous paths,
verminous creatures, demonic spirits, hags, and
necromancers. The Naga snake poses omnipotent casts
that debilitates victim. It likes to imprison meal before
consumption.’

Darkness in the prison made it harder to assess mage’s
visage, if at all. Alingbo motioned at the lock of the prison
cell. Closing eyes, the mage covered the lock with one
palm and blew a mouthful of black smoke barring any
view around his palm. After smoke wafted away it
divulged an unlocked cell door. The mage himself turned
into a lookalike figurine of Alingbo the clever and
swapped his place.

‘Now quickly swap before anyone unearths our act.
Don’t look back and walk as calmly as possible as if
there’s no mishap. At the end of the northern town
boundary, you would find your ride, a boat. Take the ride
to the desolate part of the forests there you would find a
dock to anchor. Don’t be shaken about gargantuan tidal
waves on estuary for it is there to stave off interlopers

27


--- Page 16 ---

Bapru Marma

across the seas. After docking don’t forget to store the
boat, with a chain, into thickets of bushland for these are
hiding places for wayfarers from faraway lands. Reachirig
the steepest mountain peak would test your rigour,
tenacity and sharp mind. For you would need all three
concurrently to conquer the steepest, scariest ride to the
entrance cave.’, the mage seemed out of breath after
animated conveyance of counselling.

‘What lies beyond the foothills of the mountain?’,
Alingbo’s inquisitive mind already wandering.

‘Nobody knows my dear Alingbo. For none has been able
to forage beyond the black point. The black point is the
darkest section of the forests whereas even the rays of
sun fail to penetrate and the dales portray an ominous
dark hazy gloom over the darkened pathway that is
visible by a whisker. Patches of ray filters through trees
called Grande Trees which nurtures beings of unknown
origin that frolics at the faintest odds of capturing an
infant. Villagers nearby would rarely wander out into that
part of the forest even then sightings of phantoms beings
doused in inferno whooshing past by leaving trails of
smouldering embers on ground has been sighted when
it’s least expected. Legend says beyond the black point
there lies immense fortune of gold, silver, gems, ruby and
diamonds throughout the vast expanse of the forest.’, he
gasped for breath after a prolonged oration.

‘How to do | get to the top? How can | get the potion that
you mentioned? What stratagem do | adopt to face such
a monstrosity? Above all where do | go to begin with?’,
He inquired with a quiver in his tone.

28


--- Page 17 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

‘Netherworld is where you start the expedition.
Regarding the bearing you might need to seek that
knowledge I'd rather not divulge nor do | dare to.’,
suddenly the mage turned from seemingly helpful being
to a reclusive one. His vision wandered towards a
window by the ocean and back to the dying embers of
the torch high up in the lighthouse a league away.

‘Take care dear Alingbo and be back in one piece’,

Silently he nodded in unison and traced his steps
towards al fresco positioned three flights down.

29


--- Page 18 ---

Bapru Marma

The Encounter

Kulu, the human-bird woke up to 2 seemingly wwe
tune of the forest, Giant tree foliage extends frorn ore
end to the other in his wooden hut. The hut he wae
were a dome like structure strutted with girthy bart,
cleverly shied away, in hard-to-see forest canopy,
revealed only by a tiny dim lit lantern in the middle of tre
house. Spring is around the corner though the chill taste
beyond mid-morning. Splashes of shower sprinkles
hither and thither made the grassy road slippery and hare
to ride. Though riding is not in his mind as he focused to
preen his wings for the next flight. The serene dark
ambience of the jungle porters an ominous ravenous
tranquillity perched on the verge of calarnity. Oftentimes
the serenity intruded by splashing sounds springing forth
from waterfalls nearby as fish frolics hither and thither.
Lately it’s been drizzling nonstop at every break of dawn
mystifying the greeneries of the alpine top. A haze of fog
lingers throughout the day prompting an active being to
transmute into a lethargic spirit. Sinuous traversing of
mist across the glades and dales coats the pitch-black
woodlands into mystical patch of hide and seek.
Constant splattering of rain bores him as sodden wings
turns taking flight a burdensome task leading to
unnecessary exhaustion before hunt.

Deeply lost in preening, a rustle of leaves nearby caught
his attention. Someone is heading towards this darkened
part of the forest. Never in his life has he come across a
soul in this part of the woods let alone a human being!
But against the odds of being found here is someone
walking pretty confidently towards his tree hut! Quickly
peeking through the peephole while his beak transmuted

30


--- Page 19 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

into maw, he saw a human being walking about among
the greeneries of the lawn.

Surprised as he was, the stranger waded through
sodden ground and stood in front of his porch and
knocked on the door, ‘Dear kind being how do ya do? |
have been in search of you for the last several weeks.
Lucky that you are here. If it wasn’t for the light, |
wouldn't have ever come across you nor would have a
faintest idea that a hut perched on top of a tree would be
possible! My day’s been blessed finding the hut.’

‘Only men as halfwit as you are, risks their life in
traversing the blackness of this forest. Wanderers,
drifters, rovers, and wayfarers named this place black
wood for a reason. As none has been fortunate enough
to leave the Maze of Damned to carry tales of chronicle
beyond. Why should you be exceptional? What’s so
special about you?’, Kulu inquired lazily.

Kulu stood up, bare chested and wing spread, revealing
his strong well-built triceps. His fingers suddenly
protracted forming sharp talons in its place. With
muscular built body, biceps, arms and sharp talons
there’s almost nil chance of anyone inviting him into a
duel, let alone triumphing over. Deep rumbling voice was
ominous enough to overpower a warring soul but which
kept him oblivious to a mere human being’s psyche.

After long and hard look, Alingbo quivered calmly, ‘Might
| request the service of one omnipotent Kulu whose
valorous stories travels far and wide. | might have a tough
job that will definitely challenge your, might | say, rigour
and tenacity?’

31


--- Page 20 ---

Bapru Marma

‘Within the reach of thousand leagues there is nothing
that can stymie me from my desired needs and wants’,
confidence oozed in his voice.

‘You might not be correct Kulu! | heard there is this
Ginormous serpent that keeps vigil of netherworld right
under your provision. And rumour has it that it is only a
matter of moment when you might be supplanted. None
can thwart the wringing grasp and herculean squeeze the
beast wields. Since inception of his reign of predation all
the challengers were doomed to death and none has
survived to convey tales of glory beyond the bounds of
cave.’

‘Where you might say this beast of predation lives?’, his
voice boomed across the prairie.

‘Not far from here there is a concealed cavern on the
southern shore perceptible during ebb of tide. | will light
the way if you may. Might | exert that | be your usher to
light the treacherous path down. It leads to netherworld
hundred leagues below the surface.’ he stopped.

‘Hmm The temptation to thwart such opponent is
tempting. Haven’t had challenging times lately and am
craving for epinephrine. If what you say is true then light
the way. Just the notion of encountering and trouncing
someone worthy proliferates epinephrine rush by many
folds. Thought of encountering the serpent will be cherry
on top.’, Kulu reasoned. He seemed a bit engrossed in
his own thoughts, stepped forward and got really close
to him.

‘| don’t think you take me for a fool. What your catch in
here?’, he inquired.

32


--- Page 21 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

Sharp tongue from Alingbo followed, ‘My friends are all
tied up ina dungeon by a hag. The witch won’t let anyone
leave and instead plans on ending their lives as soon as
her will are met. | don’t know what’s her plans are but |
don't want any of my friend’s lives to be part of her grand
plans. To rescue my friends, | will need a secret
concoction of elixir hidden in Naga snake’s lair. Safely
guarded by Naga, the potion is out of reach of any mortal
being.’

Kulu seemed adrift into his own thoughts, ‘Naga has
been my foe ever since dawn of the day. For centuries
numerous battles have taken place between our species.
Until an annihilation of their species Kulu never stops and
will never stop.’

At that he perched on the ground low, ‘Let’s take our
flight to the edge of the woodland.’

The word resembled akin to command. As he mounted
Kulu, he took flight in a big whoosh warping woodlands
via a strong gust of flaps. His wings spun a wide net
casting shadows on grounds. Towering woodlands
swayed below, as if in reverence, from gusty turbulence.
Bats took flight in fear of torrential downpour in dead of
day! Rodents took refuge in the deepest safety of
crevices. The simple flight created waves of melee
across the nooks and crannies, brooks and rivulets,
runnels and streamlets, bold and fearful. Streaks of rays
of sun peeked through overcast empyrean azure but
failing to pervade across the sullen woodlands’
undemeath miles astride. Suddenly distant skylines
became apparent and Alingbo closed his eyes as the
intense ray hit his eyes. Darken woodlands below belies
the existence of days or light. As they flew past hills and

33


--- Page 22 ---

Bapru Marma

hillocks each darken thickets of wildwood seemed like
animated abstract depiction. He tightened his grips as
they sped through the clouds. His face wet from blankets
of cloud shrouding their passage. Kulu’s legendary scorn
against Naga snake spans centuries of skirmish between
two species. Each, in turn, waits for opportune moments
to lend blow to other. Kulu defeating them by eating the
snakes whereas Naga snakes trying to wear them down,
writhing and wriggling forevermore making it impossible
to clasp onto. Innumerable number of his species has
succumbed to sudden perish under the most propitious
gamut of events. Even though Kulu’s wing span of 330
Yojannas* generates hurricanes of hefty turbulence,
Naga’s razor-sharp teeth along with golden scaled slick
skin embodies superior brawn to thwart the mightiest of
the bunch. A menacing task such as this demands a
cunning scheme and impeccable execution. Woods
below obscuring saplings of herbaceous origin wiggling
around banks of rivulets created a maze of confusion,
hard to track, even to the most erudite of mind. Alingbo
lost tracks of ways of bearing and after a while gave up
the effort of keeping up with fast disappearing glades
and dales, mountains and hillocks except that Kulu was
moving fast towards north. The speedy trials of travel
froze part of his face and made it numb below the line of
maw. His voice turned hoarse from exceptional cold that
hit him hard. After passage of quite some time the hazy
tufts of smouldering smokes became evident from
leagues afar. Evident enough Kulu changed his course of
Lal and covered vast expanse of stretch of length
nimbly.

34


--- Page 23 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

As he neared the first swirl of molten lava and ground
fissures Kulu inquired, ‘Where are we landing in the
expanse below?’

He replied, ‘We are not landing anywhere near the
mountaintop. You see that cascade of waterfall leagues
away that’s where we should land.’

‘But | remember you told me the beasts lives around
streams, vying for warm ambience and nests. How come
we have to land leagues away?’

‘A giant mobile shadow in the sky with wings spread-out
across miles generating wide hurricane like force is easily
noticed. If we hunker down leagues away that will
provide us with opportunities to be shadow like figurines
in dense woods before enemy notices us.’

‘| want the beasts to be terrified of me and hide. If he is
brave enough, he can fight with me and will know where
| am. But your plan seemed doomed from the beginning
as enemy will be surprised by our sneaky attack which |
arduously object. | don’t cower and with Naga snake
hmm! Let me tell you there is no creature on the planet
that my kind hates most than those beastly creatures.’

‘You will have your opportune moment Kulu. But first |
don’t want the beasts to hide when you disembark and
your onslaught begins.’, he replied.

‘Hmm | still prefer my way’, Kulu replied begrudgingly.

As if to show his dissent he picked up speed sending
saplings and overgrowth into swaying protest on a vast
expanse of fields far below.

35


--- Page 24 ---

Bapru Marma

The creeks and valleys appeared larger as they
descended on western plains of the volcanic mountain.
Plumes of dark soot covered the outcrop eliminating
shrubberies pushing them out of the range of the
smokes. Sudden heart pounding flashes of lightning
passed nearby vaporizing a parched tree into thin air. A
downpour emboldened by thunderstorm and streaks of
lightning across the visible horizon came into purview.
The downpour turned stronger and stronger as they
descended into rows of glades banking on green lakes.
Scattered rocks were blanketed with soot and dark-
greyish stones for miles across. The sparse vegetation
made the rocky plain appear alien and inhospitable to the
most egregious minded being. A prodigious amount of
snowfall perched on the escarpment contrasting the
black and white plain depicting offbeat snowscape,

Kulu gradually shrunk into smaller size the likes of human
being from his gargantuan torso. Awestricken Alingbo
stood agape. He grew with stories of kulu’s
superstrength, shapeshifting nature, adept hand

36


--- Page 25 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

manoeuvring with nails forming claws at will, gargantuan
wide wings strong enough to create hurricane even then
it struck him when Garuda displayed his features in trivial
bouts. As he realized that heresy was not wrong on omni
potency of Kulu’s brawn. The magical sleight of hands,
especially wings as it folded in pleats into a layer
resembling garment, seemed extremely mundane in
appearance. As he dabbled on the soggy grounds from
torrential thunder burst, his knee caught few dabs of
marshy bog giving it blotches of ground delineation.
Persistent splattering of rain continued on the outskirts
from time to time.

The Lair

The forest that lied beyond the outskirts of the nearest
settlement was renowned for being the creepiest
woodland. The oddities of critters dwelling in the remote
comer was so atypical that even trees were heard to be
mimicking its features. Trees with twisted bottom
forming semi arc were heard to be stationed here and
there and rumoured to be found at different places at
different times throughout the year. The trees moved!
None could confirm it. Movement was pretty frequent
across the plain and it was evident every fortnight.

37


--- Page 26 ---

Bapru Marma

Shadowy figurines slithered through the forest leaving
marks on the soggy ground but the track disappeared at
every turn and corner mystifying the origin and terminus.
An aura of suspense hung around the air. Travelers had
been thought to traverse the treacherous estuarine
waves, blanketed dark patches of the forest floor
towards an abyss of pitch-black cavernous hole on the
ground. The depths of the hole and content within it was
not known to any travellers as none has been able to
return from their trip deep into the cavern. The tales of
the hole confined only to few handfuls who has braved
to travel onto the tip of trapdoor and returned. Those who
have braved beyond the trapdoor has never returned
with any tales to share. A gloomy humm hung in the
drench forest floor, origins of which couldn’t be traced.
Moonlit nights were heard to be more treacherous than
dark night peaking during periods of penumbra when the

38


--- Page 27 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

woodland was rumoured to bridge across the chasm of
earth and netherworld, Ghosts, ghouls, phantorns,
bodach, wraiths roamed in the shadowy slimy, cold,
claggy slush pile burrowing and left marks on the soft
ground. Hidden In plain sight was that cavernous
entrance to the abyss like chasm that attracted all trails
that seemed to vanish. Clefts of the trek led to at least
eight distinguishable alleys under the glow of glow-
worms that wriggled in search of prey with incessant
sallvation drooping downward in hopes of its next meal.
The glow has transformed the underside of the cave into
a starry sky forming arc across the horizon. Somewhere
In the cave the serene sound of waterfall dropping
reverberated resulting in an ominous soiree. The jagged
edges of the limestone rocks forbade anyone curious
enough to venture with a forewarning that the upside-
down rocky turrets might inflict gouges rendering
immobility. Woods from rot timber from canoe lay next
to the shore evident that someone might have braved to
enterprise in pursuit of thrills of discovery. A sudden rise
in level of water and a sudden drop of ceiling along with
rapid drop in the journey, drew down deep into the
oceanic salty water mingled with woodland’s precipitous
trickling engorged in swirl of undercurrent tug of war.
Screeching of rodents flushing through the crevices
reverberated within the walls of the cavern. The swirling
water dominated salty water in debouching along the
walled cave all the way up to the estuarine water creating
bubbles of respite. Except a few resident rodents, lizards
and reptilian critters, the existence of the outfall that
mimicked an empty chasm, was privy to everything,
dead or living.

39


--- Page 28 ---

Bapru Marma

Deeply engrossed in caring for the concoction of elixir.
Naga closed his eyes and continued incantation. Ths
rays of daylight beamed through the nooks and crevices
of the thatched roof creating a halo of fog. Recurrent
torrents and opposing beaming rays created an aura of
spectral play across the whole woodlands as far as eyes
can travel. Naga shifted the potion in his hands, left to
right and then right to left, up and down. The act of
veneration lasted for a few more steps.

‘Throughout rills, hillocks, countryside he who quaffs
Reign of oath keeper fantabulous magic spills’

Sunlight reflected off the goblet of elixir as Naga held it
higher. He knows wary minds are always on the lookout
for its unmatched mage to heal, curse or nullify
opponents. For centuries shamans, magicians, magus,
alchemist has fought over recipe as to how to produce
such stupendous potion. None has triumphed in their
attempts to anatomize the recipe. Squabble has broken
out among gods and demigods bartering the magical
power who needs the most. A smile spread across his
face as he found himself to be luckiest one to own such
a rarity among heavens and earths.

The Sojourn

Ebbing of low tide has already begun before Kulu’s
landing on the shore. The ebb has revealed jagged
rockface pockmarked with sandstone arched entrance,
in layers, leading to darken side of the cavern. The
revealing was scantily visible only to minds curious
enough to look around and search, not for a fledgling
passer-by.

40


--- Page 29 ---

More Tales from Marma fallfore

‘The cavern you talk about is before us where shall we
etart? Lights will fade quickly in a few hours the place will
not be dark but pitch black, Unless you want to be
impaled by rough edges of sedimentary rocks lying on
the floor and ceiling, we should look for a place to camp
tonight’, Kulu rumbled,

‘We need not camp anywhere Kulu for this is the
opportune moment just before dusky twilight when Naga
bathes for the last moment and heads towards it’s lair,
We should walt in one of the chambers before Naga’s
return and only Imprison him when he sheds his cloak of
skin and becomes vulnerable in human form,’, He
replied,

‘So the plan is walt for his return and strike in his most
periled state? You are aware that need not be the case,
As for capturing him even in his most inured state | can
trounce him’, Kulu declared.

‘No! no! Kulu it is not about undermining your state as
Naga will still be as strong in his armor as without. Naga
will only seek the precious potion from clandestine place,
that none knows about, Only after shapeshifting he will
bring out the elixir, Hence, we wait in silence for his
arrival’, He replied,

‘But as soon as | sense his presence | attack and
imprison him’, Kulu replied.

Beads of water droplets formed on the ceiling through
the crevices of the jagged edges of the stony outcrop
and plonked down on the transient serene wave
underneath, Alingbo built a raft out of broken canoe
nearby, The planks from the canoes were bundled into
piles of heaps and floated. Both got on board the raft as

41


--- Page 30 ---

Bapru Marma

they drifted slowly, leisurely on top of the dwindling re
Twilight reflected off of the darkish surlace and wees
an ominous halo around. The cavern were full of rodert’s
chittering and accompanied with squealing mune &
bats flying and hitting sealings. Further down the wre
darken walls were enlightened by lights originating trom
glow worm. An eerie ambience hung in the air and he
shivered in anticipation of encounter. Underground rive
waw bifurcated by a conjoined sandstone, that stretchec
from ceiling to depths unknown. Only the sound
peddling reflected off the acoustic chamber. Giant rocks
blocked the view of next bend. Kulu had no problem
navigating through the bends, curls and in pitch black
darkness. Seeing him struggle he led manoeuvring
through twists and turns. Out of nowhere a solid wail
appeared before them but the water disappeared fast
through the wall! Trepidation overwhelmed Alingbo as
the wave dragged the raft downstream, he shrieked in
anticipation of obvious impact, eyes closed.

The dwindling raft raced faster and faster as it neared
the apparent solid wall. As if going through a portiere with
a sudden jolt the boat passed through the solid wall and
banked on the brightly lit other side. After a while
suddenly the river gave way to a giant drop falling
downward miles below. As he fell down, he closed his
eyes preparing for the worst. Alingbo suddenly felt he
was stationery and hovering over the broken pieces of
the raft. His fall and obvious demise terminated as Kulu
cupped his palm for soft cushioned landing.

Steadying himself from pounding heartbeat, he sprawled
on the sandy shore as he gasped for air. The sandy shore
led to a subterranean passage littered with glow-worm
giving off dimly lit silhouette of lengthy tunnel. Clutching

42


--- Page 31 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

Alingbo, Kulu wheezed past the stretch of slimy mucous
filled radiances. Giant stony pillars etched with stepped
stairs signified an altar of immense significance.

‘We wait behind those pillars’, he declared nonchalantly.
He is starting to catch up on his _ laggard
accomplishments so far.

The Fight

Naga was oblivious to shattered canoe on the shore line
of his temple. As usual, he stepped onto the altar and
shapeshifted his form into a human being. Except being
able to be dexterous, he is not fond of shedding skin to
morph into human being. His ultimate strength and
power, reliant on the potion of elixir, augments physical
and psychological prowess instantaneously.

‘Tincture of elixir a day

43


--- Page 32 ---

Bapru Marma

Keeps troubles away’, Naga hummed.

Skins sloughed off as Naga climbed up the steps, firs
the skin around his face gave way to a human),
countenance and then gradually sloughing off spreax
across chest, shoulder, hip, groin and at last the tail
Standing tall in front of the altar he bent his knee and
started chanting,

‘Ngoro Prema Chigo Kreshoo

Lushang Koshang Urroo Nacha Kongli
Rewang HishooRo GongKhang PreyngLi’
‘He who possess the elixir

May the world fall apart to his knee’

Slowly he inserted his whole fist into a rounded crevice
and turned left once, half turned right and then left turn
and full turn right. When the turning was complete the
seemingly giant wall bifurcated into two and gave way to
a long hall with myriad sculptures of animals from
bygone era. Eagles, sea serpent, dragons, giant tortoise
shell, leopard, panthers, devils, of gigantic shape and
size lined up the sidewalk. Naga stopped in front of a
statue of Kulu being trampled on by Naga at the foot on
the floor. His sneers reverberated on the walls. Kulu was
trembling in rage as he saw it. The insult was too much
to bear. Alingbo eyed him not to do anything. A giant
throne ornated the epic hallway illuminating the ceiling
by reflecting off scant light from ceiling. The room lit with
torches and Naga sat down on the throne and suddenly
ceiling trapdoor opened concentrating lights on Naga’s

44


--- Page 33 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

foot. The throne was inbuilt within the wall as he sat
down, he picked a tray full of vials of miniature dosages
of elixir. Before Alingbo could say anything Kulu pushed
away the boulder they were hiding with a flick of his
fingers and made a giant leap. Seeing Kulu shocked
Naga as he tried to jump and hide the vials instantly.
Before the vials were drawn again into the wall cavity kulu
snatched the cubical trays of vials and scratched Naga
in his face with pointed talons. Blood dripped from face.
Enraged Naga threw his squirts of venom. The venoms
scarred the walls and smokes rose from the walls, floors,
and small pool of water that lay in front of him. Naga
being of no less strength swinged backhand and
returned a blow to Kulu’s face that also threw him on the
floor.

The thunderous blow marked a faint red line on Kulu’s
cheek. Kneeling down he quickly lent a blow to Naga’s
knees and Naga went flying across the estuarine bank
and onto hardened stony wall and dropped face down
onto the floor. Panting he gathered himself and was
shapeshifting between figurines of serpent and human.
Kulu grabbed big boulder and shoved it into the
serpent’s giant mouth as it tried to slither away into the
murky water, Kulu continued to shove down more and
more boulders and serpent had no chances of fleeing by
any means. Weighed down by the boulder the serpent
couldn’t move, roll or slither.

‘You are not worthy of the vial! What do you intend to do
it with anyway? It’s not what you think and regardless of
your Intent It won’t work unless Veracious Chanting is
sprinkled by mel’, Naga shouted.

45


--- Page 34 ---

Bapru Marma

Alingbo stepped in and said in an earnest soft tone.
‘Great Naga we are not here to slay or kill you we just
need your help in rescuing our friend trapped at the
bottom chasm under Witch's cave.’

‘And why would | do that? You’ve come to my den
unannounced and beat me and shoved giant boulders
down my throat!’, Naga was enraged.

‘First you got to shut your mouth and listen to what he
has to say and get rid of that statue of mine or | can make
you do it with more boulders down the throat.’, Kulu
voiced angrily.

‘Dear Naga sory for this awkward meeting.
unconventional approach. But the only way my friends
are getting out of that chasm would be through your
spelled potion that will kill the witch. The witch plans to
sacrifice my friends in altar in the coming fortnight during
the blue moon. She has also imprisoned the princess as
she plans to transmute into princess lookalike and bring
whole kingdom under her reign. Her nefarious plan even
includes to extend her reign over the black forest and

beyond.’

Alingbo winked at Kulu knowing that the last bit of
information might be an exaggeration!

Weighed down by boulders Naga couldn't move but
seemed to have contemplated on the last bit of details.

‘Get me out of these shambles first and | might help you’,
Naga shrugged.

Alingbo eyed Kulu to fix him.

46


--- Page 35 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

Holding by the tail Kulu tipped him over and gargantuan
boulders started to slide down his throat gouging the
river banks and formed a tall wall reaching high up to the
skylight.

Catching up breathing, Naga continued in a raspy voice,
‘| need to open the chamber of potion and with the
correct vile need to recite incantations.’

Sliding hands into a minuscule dugout he motioned his
hands same as before. A giant door opened baring rows
of potions stacked against cavernous wall. He started
chanting in hymns of archaic vernacular. Smoke
billowing, ember flying, caustic whiff filled the cave.
When smoke cleared Naga handed over the potion.

‘Use it very carefully an omnipotent tincture use it when
the witch is at her most vulnerable. In a fortnight when
she arranges for metamorphosis she will at her most
vulnerable. But use it wisely. Sprinkle the tincture over
her head and she will be reduced to rubbish. You have
to sprinkle it before the transformation is complete
otherwise she will not be affected. So we are good?’

Naga put forward his hand Kulu wearily shaked the hand
and smile spread across him and took him for a tight hug.

Thanking both of them Alingbo took leave.

The Witch’s Play
Blue moon brings along with its ominous secrets
harbours an opportune moment for propitious minds to
enrich themselves. The witch has been waiting for this
moment a very long time. As the ember grew wilder and

47


--- Page 36 ---

Bapru Marma

wilder the fiery logs magnified the intense heat and
hovering cauldron boiled when stirred with ladle,
infinitesimal streams of hot concoction strearned
upwards towards blue moon. Nearby Alingbo waiting
silently up above the treetop with Naga’s tincture.
Witch’s incantation were accompanied by hovwirg
wolves nearby.

Gradually her metamorphosis began to shape. First her
hair turned from black to golden colour of the princess
then her face and physique. Alingbo slowly descended
to ground and tiptoed toward her. When he was about

48


--- Page 37 ---

More Tales from Marma Folklore

two yards from her the rustling of leaves exposed his
presence to wary witch.

‘So you are here to kill me or fool enough to risk your
lives for something that has no value’, Witch cackled.

Alingbo threw the tincture towards her and she produced
a transparent shield barring the tincture in mid-air until it
tipped over onto the ground and emptied.

Her laugh echoed throughout the valley.

A vine produced from her hand wrapped around his
whole body and hoisted him over the boiling cauldron.
He could feel the heat as the vine dragged him slowly
towards the boiling concoction!

She was in her hysteric laughter as she watched Alingbo
wriggled against vine’s grip in futile effort to free him. He
thought | might die if | can’t free my hand so instead, he
focused to free his right hand and wriggled in circular
motion.

Witch came close to him with her ladle and struck him
hard. The vines held him upside down and when witch
walked up to him he could smell her breathe. Blood
trickled down his forehead.

Mouth agape her cackling grew louder and bolder and
became an uproar. Suddenly right arm freed he threw
tiny tincture of vial that he separated earlier into witch’s
mouth. Startled she swallowed whole vial. Before her
transmutation was complete, she started to disintegrate
and within moments turned into dust.

Afterwards he freed the animals and princess. When king
heard the news, he openly apologized to him and asked

49


--- Page 38 ---

Bapru Marma

princess to marry him. They got married and meanwhile
the vile man who conspired against him was jailed in the
deepest dungeon where rays of sun shines only once a

year.

50
