

--- Page 1 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA:
A MODERN RE-TELLING
OF THE FOLK TALES OF

TRIPURA

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE



--- Page 2 ---

ubaai
ZUBAAN
128 B Shahpur Jat, 1st floor
NEW DELHI 110049

EMAIL: contact@zubaanbooks.com
WEBSITE: www.zubaanbooks.com

Published by Zubaan Publishers Pvt. Ltd 2020
In collaboration with the Sasakawa Peace Foundation

All rights reserved

Zubaan is an independent feminist publishing house based in New Delhi with a
strong academic and general list. It was set up as an imprint of India’s first feminist
publishing house, Kali for Women, and carries forward Kali’s tradition of publishing
world quality books to high editorial and production standards. Zubaan means
tongue, voice, language, speech in Hindustani. Zubaan publishes in the areas of the
humanities, social sciences, as well as in fiction, general non-fiction, and books for
children and young adults under its Young Zubaan imprint.

Typeset in Arno Pro 11/13


--- Page 3 ---

KERENGKOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF
THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

INTRODUCTION

While translating a book, an essay or any literary piece a strong sense
of accountability must keep the translator on her/his toes. She or he
has to be accountable for understanding the essence of the culture
she or he is tapping into. The core of a translation often involves an
encounter which proceeds from a sense of engagement and closeness.
However close one is to the culture, the traditions and beliefs of
the source, a confrontation always seems to be on the cards. “The
translator is engaged not only with mere words but with the context
in which those words appear’ (Bassnett 2012: 77-85). And words can
be deceiving. They are a culmination of a range of emotions, truths,
chances and bereavements; and sometimes it is difficult to strip them
layer by layer.

Kereng Kothoma has been a personal project. I have grown up in
Tripura, where culture as a whole is a blend of various ethno-linguistic


--- Page 4 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

groups, the dominant ethnic groups being Bengali and Tripuri (Some
of the prominent clans of Tripuris are Debbarma, Tripura, Jamatia,
Reang, Noatia, Kalai, Murasing, Chakma and Mogh). Although it
has a well-documented history of cultural exchange with the Bengali
community, it was after Partition that this relationship flourished
and blossomed into a unique position. Tripura welcomed thousands
of Bengali immigrants who were homeless, deprived of their land,
possessions and identity with open arms. It is kind of poetic that this
ancient hilly state served as their new location for culture. It is the ethos
of this place, which puts its trust on harmonious, cohesive existence,
that sort of stimulated me to take up this project.

Kereng means ‘folk’, and Kothoma means ‘tales.’ The stories in this
book circle around the lives of the Tripuris, that is, the indigenous,
working class people of Tripura and their numerous adventures and
misadventures. Originally in Kokborok language, these predominantly
nap-time stories for children have been transmitted orally through
generations since time immemorial and were on the verge of extinction
because of a dearth of carriers. These carriers are basically aged men
and women belonging to the indigenous community who witnessed
the cultural transition. These narratives were collected from these
carriers, translated into Bangla and published as a book titled Kereng
Kothoma; this was possible only because of Kumud Kunduchowdhury,
whose unrelenting efforts in fetching these folk tales from various
culturally rich, indigenous pockets of Tripura immensely helped in
establishing these stories in folklore. It is these folk tales that preserve
the minutest details of the evolution and growth of a community, its
people and their culture. I was extremely fascinated by the scope and
grandeur of imagination in the stories—the blending of the real with
the abstract, the unique style of storytelling that aimed at reinforcing
cultural values or highlighting important traditions, the intermingling
of the rich cultural history and politics of Tripura and the triumph of
good over evil (which was at par with other popular Indian folk tales
like Panchatantra and Thakurmar Jhuli).


--- Page 5 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

Out of the 14 stories in the book, I have translated four as a part
of this project because I had to follow a word limit. The first story,
Jamichholong, was collected from Jamini Debbarma; the second, The
Story of the Hen and the Cat from Shashirani Debbarma; the third,
Tetnai from Baduchandra Debbarma; and the final story, A Fox or a
Faux! from Shashirani Debbarma.

Writing for children is a subtle art, which not only involves the
ability to express complicated ideas with clarity and precision, but also
to authenticate them with relatable facts. But, when it is a children’s
book on folk tales, the onus is on the appropriation of those tales to the
present context. What appealed to me the most about Kereng Kothoma
was that even though these tales were full of mystery and adventure in
a land with lonely mountain roads and isolated farms, humble cottages
and dreadful forests, with strange happenings and wondrous deeds of
kings and thieves, there was a sense of simplicity in the contours of
the chaos that gave imagination a chance to flourish. In the translated
version, I have not only tried to retain this sense of simplicity and
coherence but also imagined the stories in the most original and also
present-day formats.

While visualising the stories I also had to deal with some
shortcomings that the book has. While re-reading the stories I
found that the handling of gender issues whether consciously or
unconsciously is quite problematic. This book does not explore or
contradict gender biases that exist in society. They follow similar
tropes of patriarchy—projecting male stereotypes, dividing sexes
into ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ and assigning typical gender-specific
roles, describing males as adventurers, independent, strong and
capable while females in their passive roles tend to be naive, sweet,
dependent and conforming. Females are sometimes constructed as
the monstrous feminine. The horror arises from the fact that a woman
breaks away from her gender-specific (feminine) roles of mother, a
damsel in distress, caretaker, and a character that merely supports
the male figure. This issue of representation of gender in children’s
literature should be handled with utmost care and alertness because


--- Page 6 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

it impacts children’s attitudes and perceptions of gender-appropriate
behaviour in society. Sexism in literature can be so insidious that it
quietly conditions boys and girls to accept the way they ‘see and read
the world’ (Fox 1993: 84-88) thus reinforcing gender images. This
reinforcement predisposes children not to question existing social
relationships. “At the same time, however, books containing images
that conflict with gender stereotypes provide children the opportunity
to re-examine their gender beliefs and assumptions’ (Singh 1998: 1-3).

In the first three stories—Jamichholong: The Braveheart, The Story
of the Hen and the Cat and Tetnai—I have taken the liberty to provide
a neutral gaze that refrains from objectifying any particular gender or
race, which demystifies the stereotypical gender constructs. I’ve tried
to establish characters and plots so that they can provide children
with alternative role models and also motivate them to embrace a
more egalitarian gender perspective. I have also made a conscious
effort to keep the stories grounded and the characters relatable. I have
modified the storylines, created sub-plots and offered a context for a
character’s motivations to suit modern times, but, simultaneously,
I’ve also attempted to retain the spirit of the original by preserving the
irreplaceable core of the stories, retaining the unmistakable signature
of the Kokborok language (the linguistic flavour, the humour, the
lyricism) and ensuring that the meaning does not get lost in translation.

On this creative journey I sometimes felt entitled to take certain
liberties with the original text which Francois Mathieu (1997)
considers a ‘kind of colonization of the text’. The translator should
not be a mere un passeur of the language but also a carrier whose
translation should be ‘both faithful to the original without complete
self-identification and liberated’ (Lise, Claire, and Malarte-Feldman
1999: 184-198). To address this issue and to provide details about
the necessity of assessing these stories from a separate vantage point I
decided to do a faithful translation of the fourth story, A Fox or a Faux!
At the end of the story I have added a translator’s note pointing out
why the story needs to be re-imagined and how this can be achieved,
thus throwing light on my process of translation.


--- Page 7 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

Finally, the project’s purpose has not only been to escort all
those narratives to the forefront only to provide them with a wide
readership, but also to extend the longevity of the stories and the
culture and tradition associated with them, so that these valuable
memories don’t get lost in this age of chaos, consumerism and instant
gratification. Furthermore I, with all sincerity, hope that my work
prompts curiosity among the children of other parts of India and
the world — allowing them to know and reflect more clearly on the
aesthetic value, the historical significance and the cultural plurality
that is so conscientiously practiced in the state of Tripura.


--- Page 8 ---

1. JAMICHHOLONG: THE BRAVEHEART

‘Mother! Tell me a story,’ pleaded little Jhimiri. Her beady eyes,
deep as the ocean were focussed perhaps waiting to hold the whole
world within.

Her mother smiled and said, ‘You have to wake up early tomorrow,
you know that right? We have so much work to do.’

‘Yes Mommy, we have to collect the seedlings from the nursery,
carefully carry them in the bamboo basket that father has made; the
roots must be intact in a wet soil ball; we have to hold it cautiously,
and then we have to put it straight with the roots in the pit and plant
the collars out. Then...’ Jhimiri enthusiastically repeated the steps her
father had taught her, while at the same time trying to imitate his voice.

‘So, you know all about planting a tree!’ her mother said tenderly
while tucking her in bed.

‘Yes Mommy. Father has told me everything. Now can you please
tell mea story? I promise to be a good girl tomorrow.’

‘Jhimiri, I have a lot of work. Let me call your father. He'll tell you
one. You hear from me every day.’

‘No no. Please! You tell me. His stories are boring.’


--- Page 9 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

‘What! Why?’

‘Lonce told him to tell me a story, and he said that one day, not very
long ago, the sky was very clear, cloudless, bright, the sun shining, birds
chirping. Suddenly dark clouds appeared from nowhere, and there was
a thunderstorm and rain which continued for five years. End of story.
When I asked him what happened next, he said nobody could go out
of their houses, so nothing happened. Everybody slept. Now you sleep
too. Boorinnnggg!”’

Her mother couldn’t help but chuckle at the daughter’s antics. She
replied, ‘Okay, but only one story! So, there was this lion and a rabbit
who lived together in a jungle...’ Jhimiri immediately interrupted, ‘No
mommy, not this one, I’ve heard this story a hundred times.’

“Then what do you want to hear?’

‘A new one. Please!’

The mother looked up at Jhimiri. She thought to herself, ‘Isn’t it a
gift that children bring? To show us a spark of innocence in the hope
that ours is still able to shine back at them?’

She started the story, a new one, and Jhimiri listened intently.

‘Once upon a time, in the hilly state of Tripura, there lived a
man called Jamichholong. He was brave and mighty, so stories of
his indomitable spirit spread to every terrain and beyond. Such was
his bravery that people believed he could tame courage and move
mountains. Tales of his valour passed around as bedtime stories.
Legend has it that he could cut 1,000 bamboo trees in one strike and
effortlessly carry them on his shoulders to build a house with them. It
might sound unreal, but it was believed that he felt no pain. He could
also eat a lot, so much so that he used to devour an entire pig by himself
for dinner! When he went hunting, the animals and birds fled creating
a rumble in the forest, announcing his arrival.’

‘Well he is a bad person,’ Jhimiri interrupted. ‘May I know why?’
the mother asked. ‘Well for starters, he kills animals. And also, he
eats an entire pig! So gross Mommy. Seems like he is very foolish.’
The mother couldn’t resist laughing, “Well this story is not just about


--- Page 10 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

Jamichholong, my girl.’ Jhimiri seemed genuinely relieved. So her
mother continued.

“One day Jamichholong thought, “What if I travel the whole world
and discover new places? Everyone in Tripura praises me and calls
me fearless, but what about other places, the distant realms? What if
there is a braver, stronger human who can challenge me?” One fine
day, he packed his bags and embarked on a journey to the unknown in
search of other gifted people like himself. He hiked across the moors,
trudged up rocky hills, trekked through strange forests and radiant
shrubberies and ambled along colourful springs and rivers. After
several days of walking and wandering, he came to a valley where he
saw a man at a distance ripping up something with his bare hands. He
was intrigued. What was this person doing in a quiet place like this?
Slowly he advanced towards him. When he came close, Jamichholong
was shocked to see that the person was pulling apart the guts of small
mountain flies and was searching for something inside.

“What are you doing?” asked Jamichholong.

“I am tearing apart Iyongkha flies’ bellies to see what’s in there,”
the man stated.

“Wow! These flies! We can barely see them with our naked
eyes and you are ripping their guts out! You are a strange fellow!”
Jamichholong exclaimed in surprise.

“Why do they bite so much? I came here to hunt, and these
idiots are constantly bothering me. That’s why I am examining their
stomachs to find out why their bites sting so much!” replied the man.

“What are you saying? Wow! You're really a braveheart.”

‘Hearing this, the man laughed and said, “Are you kidding me? Iam
no braveheart. There’s only one braveheart, and he is none other than
Jamichholong. Wish I could meet him once.”

‘Hearing the man speak about him in such a manner, Jamichholong
decided to play along, “So, where does this person of yours live? Can
you tell me? I would surely like to meet him myself.”


--- Page 11 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

“Listen to me. You see that hill up there, behind that hill there’s
another hill, and then another, beyond that lives Jami. Do you know
that he eats an entire pig by himself?” the man asked.

“Is that so? Listening to this my stomach’s aching!” said
Jamichholong. “Oh god! And his doesn’t? Okay. Let’s go and find this
person. I could definitely use company. Would you like to join me?” he
asked the man.

“Of course! I have always wanted to meet him. I am all in,” said the
man and jumped up in delight.

‘They began their journey through the wilderness, Jamichholong
keeping his identity secret all along. After some time, they reached a
place under a hill. “Now where?” asked the man. Jamichholong insisted
on climbing the mountain. Reaching the top, they saw a river far away
in the distance, which curved gently through the greenery, distinctly
visible. Its silver-coloured water glinted as the sun’s rays kissed its
surface. They both began walking towards it.

“On reaching the river bank, they were astonished to find that a
man was trying to stop the flow of the water of the hilly river by putting
his body on the line. They had never encountered such a powerful
person before.

“Hey friend, you're such a strong person; you have created a dam
with your body! This is insane,” Jamichholong said.

“Me? No no! I am nothing compared to Jami. He can fatally injure
a mad elephant with his bare hands,” the man replied.

“Well, we are looking for him. Do you want to join us?” added the
man accompanying Jamichholong.

“Not a bad idea. I too have never met him. Let’s find him and
see for ourselves how powerful he really is.” Saying this, the man too
joined the two on their journey.

‘Now there were three of them. They walked on endless grey old
paths with scattered pale leaves and broken twigs. Everything was
silent compared to the other places they had travelled. There was no
chirping of birds or howling of the wind. Everything seemed quiet and


--- Page 12 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

organised. While walking through the rough hilly terrain, suddenly
they came across a beautiful little cottage. They were surprised. They
started wondering who had built this cottage so deep in the forest.
They entered the cottage. It was a small little house. The interiors were
neatly done, the surface clean, the furniture and other accessories well
maintained, as if somebody lived there. But they couldn’t find anybody
in the vicinity. Strange! they thought.

‘Anyway, they were all tired and hungry because of the strenuous
journey, so Jamichholong suggested that he shuffle across the house,
arrange a fire, crockery and other cooking ingredients, while the other
two scurried over to the forest and brought a couple of wild roosters,
so that he could cook some tawhaan’ for themselves. The other two
obliged and went hunting in the forest.

‘After they had left, Jamichholong kept himself busy in the kitchen.
He had to start the fire, cut vegetables and other ingredients, which
he handpicked from the garden beside the house. While doing all this,
he kept thinking, “Whose place is this? Such a beautiful house in such
a secluded place, and no one staying here! It’s a little odd.” In reality,
this place belonged to a mysterious being. Some believed that it was
a sacred being who protected the forest and the animals. She was
actually a woman, and her name was Maya.

‘In those days, there was a steady increase in in Tripura’s
population. Humans were destroying forests and stripping the earth
of its resources to accommodate this increasing population. Trees
were cut and land cleared allowing the exposed earth to wither and
die along with the destruction of the habitat of innumerable species,
with no food or shelter. Maya meditated every night to attain spiritual
affirmation to end this madness, thinking about all the animals and
wildlife that the humans had destroyed. She apologised for their sins
and promised to clean their habitat and rebuild what had been crushed
and poisoned. In her there was this precarious balance between the
forces of good and evil.

‘Whenever somebody entered the jungle for hunting innocent
animals or cutting trees for wood, she lured them craftily to her house,


--- Page 13 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

took good care of them and when the time was right, incapacitated
them and sent them to the forbidden part of the forest, which was like
a maze with numberless dangers from which there was no escape.

“On that day, Maya had gone out in search of food as part of her
daily routine. After seeing the three of them entering her house from
a distance and later two of them entering the jungle, she raced back
home. She didn’t trust them.

“On returning, Maya saw that they had not only entered the house
but were also using her things, and she noticed that someone was trying
to light the oven in her kitchen. She was very angry. She took a heavy
staff and struck Jamichholong at the back of his head. Yes, the violence
was unnecessary. She could have just asked. But she was under stress
for a lot of reasons, so she acted impulsively. But Jamichholong was
unperturbed. He was busy doing his work. Maya was stunned. She had
struck with such great force and still this man had not even flinched!
How was this even possible? She struck again with all her strength,
but nothing happened. Jamichholong thought that some insect had
climbed over his back, so he scratched his head once. It never occurred
to him that someone was hitting the back of his head with a club.
Maya screamed loudly and it was only then that Jamichholong turned
around. He was surprised to see an unkempt female, of his size with a
spark in her eyes attacking him with all her strength. The curiosity in
his eyes could show that he was first amazed and also impressed by her
superior physical form and then struck by the sudden realisation that
the person was trying to kill him. So he asked in a deep voice, “Who
are you? Why are you trying to kill me? What has happened to you?”
Maya got more enraged by his questions. “Who am I? I am the spirit of
this jungle! I am Maya,” she retorted. She thought to herself, “I have
debilitated so many arrogant little twats like him and sent them to
exile. Who does he think he is?”

‘She continued, “You savages! You come to the forest, you take
everything from her and in return you give her a slow, painful death.
You slash the trees, burn the leaves, murder the animals and pollute
the rivers. I will teach you a lesson today!”


--- Page 14 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

“Look, I don’t want to fight you. Clearly there has been a mistake. I
am not one of them. Believe me, I am as protective of the forest as you
are,” Jamichholong replied in an affectionate but bold voice.

“Don’t try to deceive me boy. It will not work. I have seen many
people like you. Lying, manipulating men with hidden agendas who
only want profit for themselves. Fight me, you coward!”

“Can’t we just sit and talk?”

Maya was surprised to hear this. What was this man saying? In the
middle of this jungle, in the dead of night, this man wanted to sit and
talk? Many men came and went, a few survived, a few perished, but
none had the guts nor the valour like this one right here.

“You said your name is Maya, what a beautiful name! Not a Tripuri
name though,” Jamichholong said.

‘Maya wasted no time. Clearly this person was trying to make small
talk. She attacked. They engaged in a fierce battle. A gash of radiant
light broke through the cauldron-black sky. It was an all-out war. The
place had a cold, malevolent air; the wind howling past every which
way as if trying to express its own confusion at the sudden clash. The
two friends who returned with the hens, quickly hid seeing the fight.
The duel continued for several hours. Maya smashed an elbow into
the side of Jamichholong’s skull, the soft spot high on the temple. A
sudden gush of pain jolted through Jami’s body. His stomach twinged,
his arms lost their tension and his legs began to weaken. He was tired
and exhausted. He fell.

“Maya wanted to finish this then and there, but she stopped. There
was something pure in Jamichholong’s eyes, something deep as the
ocean, wanting to hold the whole world. She hesitated.’

Jamichholong, catching his breath, said, “Come on, finish it.”

Maya didn’t reply. She was watching him closely. Jamichholong
struggled to get up; he was wounded and gasping for air, “You know
Maya, these fights have no moral codes, no meaning, no purpose at all.
We fight to end another fight.” He was in extreme pain.


--- Page 15 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

‘His words struck a chord with Maya. She threw her staff away and
turned back to leave.’

Jamichholong shouted, “You know, I came here in search of a man
stronger than me, instead I found a woman who is not only stronger
but also possesses the highest virtue—the act of showing mercy. That
still makes me the strongest man on the planet though!”

“Maya smiled. “What do you want?” she asked. “Nothing much,
just a conversation,” Jami replied.

“Okay, clean up. I am going inside. And also tell those two stupid
friends of yours to stop hiding.”

“Brothers, please come out, enough already. It’s over.”

‘That night they had a feast. They discussed myriad topics.
Maya told Jamichholong about her father who was an honest and
hardworking person, and that they came to the forest to play and
collect fruits. One day, some hunters killed her father because he tried
to stop them from killing a Kasturi deer. “You know, the one with the
sweet smell?” she remembered fondly. She ran away from that sight.
They tried to find her, but she hid deep in the jungle so that nobody
could ever find her. She lost her way back home; she lost her way back
to life.

‘Jami and his friends listened to her. Jamichholong then revealed
his name to everyone. His two friends were stupefied. They were in
complete awe, but Maya said, “What kind of name is this?” It sounded
very funny to her. Jamichholong was happy that Maya treated him like
a friend, like a regular human being, equal to her, one she could laugh
and share her secrets with. Gradually the two of them started getting
along. It was believed that they had genuine affection for each other.
Both of them found common interests in their love for animals and for
the environment.

‘Years passed and their love grew stronger. They got married.
Jamichholong tried to find Maya’s mother, and was finally able to
reunite them. That was the first time Jami saw Maya cry. Everybody
cried. They were tears of joy. Maya and Jami returned to their beautiful


--- Page 16 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

house in the forest along with her mother and vowed to protect the
forest from further attacks. They also found others who were working
for the same cause. They formed a group and started working together.
They started planting trees every morning and took care of the
animals. The two friends who had initially joined Jamichholong on his
journey helped them and protected the forest in their own ways. Maya
and Jami lived happily ever after’.

‘What a story Mom! I really liked it. It feels like I know them, like
they are in some way connected to me.’ Little Jhimiri was ecstatic. Her
mother smiled and planted a cheek on little Jhimiri’s forehead. ‘Okay
girl, now go to sleep. Enough for today. I have to go help your father.
Goodnight.’

The mother slowly closed the door and went to the other room.
The father was there, cleaning and cutting vegetables for next day’s
feast. ‘So, the story took long! Is she asleep?’ he asked. ‘Yeah finally.
She likes my stories better by the way,’ the mother replied.

“Oh! Does she now?’

‘Yeah, your stories are boring. She wanted to listen to a new one.’

‘So, which one did you tell her?’

‘The story of Jamichholong and Maya.’

The father stopped, looked up, laughed and said, ‘I am still the
strongest man though.’

‘Yeah right,’ the mother chuckled as she joined him.


--- Page 17 ---

2. THE STORY OF THE HEN AND THE CAT

2.1

In the southern part of the mountain clad Tripura, there was a village
in Belonia. In the farthest corner of that village, free from the hustle
and bustle, inside a small hut lived a hen. She was a free-spirited, self-
sufficient working mother who lived with her kids. Part of the reason
she chose to live in that area was the greenery, the fresh air and the
calmness that surrounded her children and her.

In the morning, the hen went to the paddy fields to eat grains,
clucking all along. Her obedient chicks followed their mother gleefully,
cheeping and tweeting. Before noon they came back and relaxed in
the sunlit courtyard in front of their house. They watched the sunlight
creep into the forest, bathing the leaves and the flowers with a warm
glow. Then they left again at noon to visit a nearby household, to eat
some more grains and then returned to their peaceful residence before
darkness surrounded the place. In this way, the sun rose and set in the
hen-house. They were happy. But happiness doesn’t always last. A
perfect storm was waiting for them.


--- Page 18 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

A cat stayed in their neighbouring house. She was a tenacious
little mouser who was trying to befriend the hen. At first, the hen was
reluctant and suspicious of her motives. She was afraid that the cat
might have wicked intentions like eating her children. She was always
on pins and needles. But she had no choice but to give into the cat’s
persuasions as she had a unique way with words, always charming
and eloquent. She could win anybody’s heart. But the hen thought to
herself that she must warn her kids about this aunt of theirs and that
she ought to be more careful herself. Before bed time she gathered
her little ones and said, ‘Listen to me. You all are growing up. You all
know how to feed yourselves, how to select and eliminate the chaff
and eat the grains. Now you understand certain things related to life
much better than before. You’re not little anymore. There should be
a healthy dialogue between you and me. I must tell you, something is
bothering me, and it has been bothering me for a long time. I know
I might be overthinking, but I have to tell you. This Aunt Catty of
yours, I think she has got some agenda in her tiny little whiskers. Every
evening she comes to our house, plays poker, chit chats, but her eyes
are always on you all. She notices every step you take, every move you
make. Nowadays she comes twice a day. So be careful, cautious and
have each other’s back, come rain or shine.’

Petrified on hearing this, the chicks came closer to their mother
for comfort. ‘What’s going to happen Mommy?’ they asked, their big,
concerned eyes wide open. Mother-hen caressed her children and said,
‘Don’t worry. There is a way out. Always listen to me. Always listen to
your mother, then no harm will ever befall you.’ They all nodded their
heads in unison.

2.2

After a few days, Aunt Catty came to their house and called the mother,
‘Sister, are you home? Sis?’ Mother-hen and her children were relaxing


--- Page 19 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

and enjoying the warmth of the sun on a winter morning after having
breakfast. She gave her children the signal. They were prepared. The
moment they heard their Aunt Catty, they hurriedly marched back to
their rooms. Aunt Catty was furious but somehow controlled herself.
Recovering her poise, she asked the mother-hen, ‘Sister, why are they
running away after seeing me? Are they afraid of me?’

‘No, no, sis. What are you saying?’ said mother-hen. ‘Why would
they be afraid of you? You're their Aunt Catty. Actually, a wild cat has
been following them since last Monday, so they're a bit jittery and
scared. I guess they mistook you for that nefarious creature. Please
don’t mind. Okay, listen, I was thinking of making pitha® for the kids.
It’s almost kouchengma,* and I haven’t had the chance to make any. I
was wondering if you could come too. They are all clamouring for the
mom-special pitha. I need your help for this. If you’re free please come
tomorrow evening. Then we can make it together.’

Catty was not happy. It stung her that those chicks didn’t even
acknowledge her. But in a fake, nonchalant voice she said, ‘Since
you've requested me, I'll surely come. But your kids, the way they fled
after seeing me, I guess they are not comfortable with me being around
them,’ she said and left.

That night mother-hen caressed and kissed her children. She was
very happy that her kids had followed her instructions. She told them,
‘Listen, tomorrow I'll make you all some pitha. In the evening, you'll
all stay at home in the dining hall. Then your Aunt Catty will arrive,
and we'll be busy grinding rice. Remember to stay near the oven. She'll
never come near the fire. Besides, I’ll keep her busy outside. After we
have made the pitha, she'll eat and go home. Simple. So no need to
worry. Understood?’ Everybody said yes. The chicks were over the
moon—tomorrow they would get to eat so many types of pitha—puli-
pitha, pati-sapta and fried pitha—they were drooling at the thought.
They thought if Aunt Catty didn’t come it would be so much more fun.

The next day mother-hen woke up early. She had lots of work to
do. She told her kids to fend for themselves as she was going to be
busy. Then she went to bring some cow dung to paint the courtyard.


--- Page 20 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

After coating her place of work with cow dung she left it to dry. Then
she scrubbed and cleaned the kitchen. It was spotless. She was content
with her work. Then she smoked some tobacco. She was visibly tired
and needed some rest. After some time when the cow plop was dry,
she spread the rice grains and scattered them with her beak so that
each and every grain was exposed to sunlight. Then she adjusted the
husking machine and started husking the paddy. The kids playfully
started circling the husking machine. Mother hen was having a whale
of a time. After so many days she would be able to feed her children
pitha. After a while the paddy was converted into rice. Then she started
winnowing to separate the rice grains from the chaff. The winnowed
rice looked fresh. She then went into the kitchen and dipped the rice
in water. All of a sudden, the thought of the arrival of the cat ruined
her mood. All kinds of nuisance! ‘No one has ever heard of a cat being
friends with a hen,’ she thought. “Your main purpose is to eat my
children, isn’t it, you evil creature?!’

2.3

The last rays of sunlight had kissed the heartland. The usually sunlit
courtyard was dark. The birds had gone to roost, and the crickets had
started singing in the swaying grass. Mother-hen was crushing the rice
and dusting it off. No sign of the cat. She was pretty irked by the cat’s
no show. ‘She'll come only to eat pitha,’ she mumbled. After crushing,
the rice had become thin. Then she went to the kitchen with the fine
textured rice powder. The chicks were excited. ‘Finally, the time has
come,’ they thought. Mother-hen had already brought some jaggery in
the morning. She daubed the rice powder with the jaggery and some
water. While blending them delicately she told her kids, “Today I'll
only make fried pitha. There is no coconut or milk in the house, so I
will not be able to make any pati-sapta or puli-pitha.” Then she lit up
the oven. She had already made round shaped chunks from the batter.


--- Page 21 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

She put a frying pan on the oven, and when it was hot enough, she
poured some oil. There was a splashing sound when the oil touched
the pan. Just at that moment Aunt Catty called from outside.

‘Sister, are you home?’ The kids had their hearts in their mouths.
Mother-hen replied from the kitchen, ‘What? You have come sister?
What happened? Why are you so late? I was looking forward to your
arrival. So much work, how can I do everything alone? I was just frying
the initial batch of pitha. There is no space in the kitchen, please sit
on the verandah outside, I am coming with some hot and crispy pitha
for you.’

Now, Mother-hen was frying the pitha while serving them to her
kids. She had no time for entertaining her cat-sis. The cat sat outside
on the verandah in the cold for some time. Winter had already
arrived. She was shivering. A cold wind was blowing through the vast,
unobstructed paddy fields. She was so angry that she was shaking.
She kept contemplating, “That stupid hen invited me over here, and
now she is humiliating me in this way. She didn’t have the courtesy
to say hello to me let alone bring some food or water. Okay! I’ll teach
her some manners. I'll eat her little munchkins one by one. Then
she'll learn.’

Just then, mother-hen arrived with a plate full of hot, crispy pitha.
The cat was overjoyed. Sitting out in the cold, she hadn’t realised that
she was very hungry. She gobbled down all the delicious pithas. Then
mother-hen brought a glass full of water. The cat thanked her for her
hospitality and while leaving said, “Those were delicious, sister. I'll
send my kids over to your house. They'll be delighted to eat such yum-
yum fried pithas. They haven’t eaten them in such a long time.’

Mother-hen was furious. ‘First, she ate a whole plate full of pitha
all be herself, now she will send her children! What does she think? I
don’t have any other work or what! And besides, I haven’t eaten one
single piece. Okay, let them come. I will prepare such pitha that they'll
remember the taste their whole lives.’ The chicks were happy to see
their aunt leave, but when they got to know about the imminent arrival
of her children, their hearts started pounding again. Mother-hen was


--- Page 22 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

smart but gross. The next thing she did was unthinkable. She collected
some cock/hen poop from all around the house and mixed it with the
leftover rice powder and deep fried it. After some time, the kittens
came meowing. Mother-hen had no other choice. She ought to teach
that silly cat a lesson. She gave the kittens the specially made pitha ona
banana leaf. The kittens had never seen such food. They gorged on it.
But after a moment they realised that the taste and smell were highly
unpleasant. They were confused because their mom had told them
that they were delicious. But these ones tasted like poop. Poor little
things, they were staring at each other’s faces. Then they all left. While
returning home some of them puked too.

The cat was enraged hearing this from her kids. ‘T'll not spare her.
She gave my little kids shit to eat! I will not spare her. I'll eat all of them
right now,’ she was shaking with anger. She sprinted towards the hen-
house. Mother-hen was cleaning the messy kitchen after having sung
her kids to sleep. She had kept some pitha so that her children could
eat it the next day. Suddenly she heard the cat’s voice, ‘Sister, what
did you do?’ Mother-hen smelt danger. “The cat has come at such a
late hour; something must be wrong,’ she sensed. She casually replied,
‘What happened, sis? You're here at this hour? Anything wrong?’

‘What did you feed my children? They’re puking and feeling
unwell. They said that you served them rotten food. And it tasted like
shit. Why did you do such a thing?’ Aunt Catty asked angrily.

‘What are you saying? Oh, now I realise. I made a mistake feeding
them pitha. What can I do? We are not very rich people. Didn’t have
ghee and all. Cooked those with what we have. Please forgive me, it’s
my fault,’ mother-hen replied in a soft tone.

‘Okay, okay. I came to inquire about this. Another thing, where are
you sleeping tonight?’ the cat asked slyly.

Mother-hen felt a thud inside her heart. She spoke carefully, ‘Sister,
we'll sleep by the furnace, on the bamboo shelf.’

After the cat had wandered off, mother-hen woke up the chicks.
They were fast asleep after eating plenty of pitha. She spoke to them


--- Page 23 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

in a hushed voice, ‘Listen carefully, your Aunt Catty has just left.
Tonight, we can’t sleep in the kitchen. As scary as it may sound, your
aunt is coming to eat all of us. We'll sleep in another room. Let’s go
hide before she comes.’ Then she took them to the adjoining room and
instructed them to keep quiet when their aunt came. The kids were
fast asleep after some time. But mother-hen was awake. The night was
long. Deep into the night, suddenly, the door opened with a screeching
sound, and the cat was there looking for them. She was humming,

Will eat them all- Meow
Will kill them all- Meow
Deep into the night
Nobody will fight

They are all cowards
They've lost their sight
Will eat them all- Meow
Will kill them all- Meow
Meow Meow Meow!

Singing she entered the kitchen, but there was no sign of the hen
family. She searched thoroughly but couldn’t find any trace of them.
She was very angry; her face distorted with rage. Before leaving she
ate all the remaining pitha left for the chicks and defecated all over the
kitchen.

2.4

The next day, mother-hen woke up a little bit late. She went to the
kitchen and was horrified to see what the cat had done to the place. It
had been torn down and filled with filth. Further, the cat had eaten all
the remaining pitha. Out of anger and pain, tears rolled down mother-
hen’s cheeks. In the evening, the cat arrived again. Seeing her the


--- Page 24 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

chicks went inside the house. The cat didn’t pay any attention to them.
She said, ‘Sis, | have come to you looking for a thing.’

‘What do you want?’ the hen asked.

‘Will you give me your winnowing fan?’

“Of course.’

While taking the fan the cat asked again, ‘Where shall you sleep
tonight?’

‘Tonight! Tonight, we'll sleep on the deck.’

After the cat had left, mother-hen called her kids and said, ‘Listen,
tonight we'll sleep inside a marowa’ okay! Your aunt will again come
tonight.’

In the evening, she fed the chicks and went inside the marowa
to sleep. The chicks were not well. They had eaten more pitha than
they could digest. This led to indigestion and upset stomachs. They
were farting occasionally and had gone to the bathroom several times.
Inside the congested atmosphere of the marowa, they were also feeling
uncomfortable. Mother hen urged them to be quiet. Again, at midnight
the cat came dancing and singing,

Will eat them all- Meow
Will kill them all- Meow
Deep into the night
Nobody will fight

They are all cowards
They've lost their sight
Will eat them all- Meow
Will kill them all- Meow
Meow Meow Meow

Entering the house, she jumped on to the deck but couldn’t find
them. ‘Again, they have tricked me,’ the cat said. Still she didn’t
lose hope. She searched and searched. Inside the marowa, a serious
problem surfaced. After hearing the cat’s cry, the chicks were shaking
with fear. The poor little things were so frightened that they were

24


--- Page 25 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

having stomach cramps. When the cat, after searching the whole place,
came near the marowa, out of fear all the chicks farted in unison. It was
like a loud eruption, like several trumpets blowing together. Such was
its sound that the marowa broke into several pieces. Thinking there
had been an explosion the cat took to her heels. She thought that the
hen had planted an explosive to kill her. She said to herself, “Whoa!
That was close. That stupid hen had planned to kill me. But I am alive.
I'll come again tomorrow. She can’t protect herself or her children
every day.’

The next morning, mother-hen was very anxious. She knew that
the cat would come again. Every day she was trying to kill them. This
couldn’t go on forever. She had a life; her kids had a future. She hadn’t
slept for the past three nights. Then she devised a plan to put a check
on the cat once and for all. She took a big pan from the kitchen and
went to the fields and brought five or six catfish. Then she smoked
some tobacco. While smoking she made some sharp knives out of
bamboos. She took these knives and planted them inside the bamboo
fence all around the kitchen. She put the catfish inside the water jar
and placed it next to the oven. Then she went inside and brought two
rotten eggs and placed them inside the fire place and then spoke to
herself, ‘Let’s see, sister, who wins today.’

That evening again the cat came. This time her excuse was returning
the winnowing fan. They didn’t talk much. There was tension of things
unsaid. They looked at each other carefully with intense eyes. Both of
them wanted to know the other’s next step. To ease the tension, the
hen asked, ‘What did you do with the fan?’ ‘Nothing much, winnowed
the rice grains. Will see if I can make some pitha for my kids,’ the cat
replied. Before leaving she asked, ‘Where are you sleeping tonight?’

‘In the kitchen, near the fireplace,’ the hen replied coldly.

It was dusk. Mother-hen prepared food for her children. After
dinner, they all climbed on to the cross-beam in the kitchen and slept.
But mother-hen was awake. The cat came before midnight. She had
vowed to kill every single one of them today, and she intended to
keep that promise. That’s why she came earlier, giving no room for


--- Page 26 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

the opposition to regroup. She moved slowly, crossed the courtyard,
then very cautiously opened the door and entered the small hut. She
hummed once again,

Will eat them all- Meow
Will kill them all- Meow
Meow Meow Meow

She entered the kitchen. But she couldn’t see the hen family. She
thought, “Today I'll not leave this place till I’ve killed them all. I will
search every inch of this house.’ At that very moment, mother hen
spoke from the cross-beam, ‘Hey sister, today we didn’t hide. My kids
are unwell, and since the room is warm, we slept here. I have kept two
eggs for you inside the fireplace. Please blow the fire, boil them and
eat. Then you can eat us. Where can we go every day? There is not a
place on earth where you can’t find us. We are nothing in front of you.’

The cat beamed. She was also hungry and was tempted to eat the
eggs. She started blowing the fire in the fireplace. The place was hot.
The fire breathed out. She again gave a puff. Then with a huge noise
those rotten eggs blasted on the face of the cat and seriously injured
her. Reeling with pain she shouted, ‘Sister! Sister! Please save me...
please.’ She was now rolling on the floor.

The hen, controlling her laughter, retorted, ‘What happened, sis?
What happened?’

‘I can’t see a thing! My eyes are blinded, they’re burning. Oh my
god! Where is the water? I have to wash my eyes... please tell me...’
she cried.

‘Sis, there is a jar of clear water just next to the oven. Please find it
and use it.’

The cat thought to herself, ‘Ah, I will pour some cold water into my
eyes. That will surely make me feel better.’

She found the jar nearby, but the minute she put her hands into
the jar, the catfish, all at once, stung her. The cat shouted at the top of
her voice, ‘Sister, please help me, please. I have committed so many


--- Page 27 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

sins. I am a sinner. Please help me.’ Mother-hen replied, ‘Sister, just
beside the fireplace there’s the bamboo fence. Rub your hand there,
you'll get relief, I hope.’ The cat, with excruciating pain in her eyes
and on her hand, was perplexed, bewildered and half-dead. Listening
to the hen she crawled towards the fence and rubbed her hands there.
But alas! Those knives set by the hen almost cut her hands off. She let
out a mind-numbing cry and became unconscious. She didn’t regain
consciousness that night. The next day, mother-hen found her dead.
From that day onwards, cats and hens have never been friends.


--- Page 28 ---

3. TETNAI

3.1

The historic town of Udaipur situated in Gomati district was once the
capital of Tripura. Today it is famously known for its lakes and temples,
but some 100 years ago, it was rather infamous for the huge upsurge
created by a circle of thieves in and around the town. In this land of
red soil, also known as Rangamati, hardly a day went by without some
family or the other reporting losses due to theft. The leader of the
circle was Tetnai. Nobody knew the identity of the thieves. They came
wearing hoods in the dead of night like slithering snakes and sneaked
inside the houses and looted everything.

Actually, these thieves were seven women. Under the leadership of
Tetnai, the ferocious leader, these seven notorious, extremely skilful
thieves walked through the town at night and committed both petty
and grand theft. Tetnai was bold, fearless and sharp as a tack. She
was like a raging torrent, free in her wildness. She came up with and
executed such ideas as people could only imagine in their wildest
dreams. She could blend in in any scenario. She was a master of the


--- Page 29 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

craft; nobody had seen such a smart thief before. Despite constant
vigilance, she would throw dust in everybody’s eyes and steal
everything. She would say, ‘So few have so much, and so many have so
little. Let us bring some balance.’

However, Tetnai was not happy stealing from the commoners in
the city regularly. After all, they were all working-class people with
very limited valuable possessions. Stealing from them would negate
her whole purpose of bringing balance. Tetnai thought of herself
as a woman with a greater purpose. Never in history had the people
of Tripura seen a woman thief of this calibre. She wanted more. She
wanted to commit a big heist. A heist that would change everybody’s
lives. A dangerous idea crept into her mind. She fixated on stealing
from the king’s palace. She set up a perfect plan. It seemed easy. First,
she would go to the king’s court and ask for a job at the royal palace.
It could be any job—washing clothes, cleaning the floors, serving as
an errand girl or anything of that sort, it didn’t matter. Following her
employment, she’d steadily learn the nitty-gritty, the daily conduct
of the king’s residence. After studying and knowing every nook and
cranny of the palace by heart, she would call her friends and show
them the rooms filled with gold, diamonds and other riches, and they
would steal everything. After the heist they would never have to steal
or earn a penny for the rest of their lives and for generations to come.

The next day, Tetnai, taming her nervousness, went to the king’s
court and sought permission to meet the king to ask for a job. But
she was rejected instantly. It wasn’t easy to meet the king. The king
was a busy man; he didn’t have time to deal with common people like
her. Tetnai came back dejected but didn’t lose hope. She assured her
comrades that she would positively find a job at the palace by hook
or by crook. At last, after constant requests and pleading, one day she
got permission to meet one of the king’s ministers. In a very dramatic
fashion, she narrated to the minister her poor condition and how
desperately she needed a job. Struck by Tetnai’s beauty and pleased by
her passionate description, the minister’s heart melted. He felt for her.
He thought that Tetnai was an honest and poor woman in dire need of


--- Page 30 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

a job and that he was doing her a favour. So he employed Tetnai, and
she was given the responsibility of cleaning the rooms, washing clothes
and attending to the queen.

3.2

Tetnai was very happy. Her seven thief-friends were informed about
her new job. Tetnai stayed in the palace and did her duties with utmost
dedication and diligence. During her stay, she observed everything in
the palace, noting every detail of the household and its people. After
only a few days people were impressed by her honest behaviour and
hardworking nature. She even earned the trust of the queen who was
so pleased with Tetnai that she showed her the closet where she kept
her most precious and invaluable jewels. Days passed and gradually
Tetnai became the most popular person in the palace and the go-to-
girl for every problem.

After about a month, she requested a vacation to visit her residence.
On that day, she held a secret meeting with the circle of thieves. After
dinner, they discussed how to approach this heist that they were
planning for so long.

Tetnai said, “There is a door at the side of the lake in the royal
residence. I'll be there at midnight. Come stealthily and knock three
times on the door.’

The thieves asked, “What are we going to steal?’

‘We'll be stealing from the royal residence only. The queen
possesses some of the most beautiful diamond engraved jewellery
I have ever seen. If we can steal the ornaments of the queen and the
princess, we can live the rest of our lives without doing a thing. Another
thing, there is a pot full of gold coins in the queen’s room. She keeps it
close to herself, even sleeps with it by her side. If we can bag that then
we'll be queens ourselves.’


--- Page 31 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

‘We are seven people here. To increase the share, we must steal
some expensive utensils from the kitchen too.’

‘Don’t worry about that. Your heads will spin when you enter the
kitchen. You have never seen that many utensils.’

The whole night they talked about their strategies, plotting and
planning. Tetnai’s thief-friends were thrilled. Till then they had only
stolen from the commoners, the middle-class people of the town. Now
that they had got this chance to become some of the richest people in
the kingdom, they couldn’t control their excitement. Their discussion
continued till dawn. The next day, Tetnai returned to the palace and
again engaged herself with her daily work. The date of the heist was
gradually coming nearer. Tetnai had goose bumps. She became more
and more restless.

3.3

The day of the heist finally arrived. Everybody finished dinner in
the first hour of the night. Tetnai, after cleaning up everything, went
to sleep like everybody else, but in reality she was awake. When the
clock struck midnight, she woke up. With caution she observed her
surroundings. There was silence everywhere. But the whistling of
the guards and the sound of snoring coming from some of the rooms
far and near disturbed its profoundness. Tetnai’s mind was full of
possibilities, each more fanciful than the last. A spark came to her
eyes. Crouching carefully, she went to the side of the back-door and
waited there, alert and attentive. She was trembling with excitement.
Suddenly she heard three distinct knocks on the door. She opened the
door quickly and let her friends in. Everybody, aware of their roles,
instantly got to work. They had steady nerves, but the gravity of the
situation made them twitch and think of the worst-case scenario.
They were stealing from the king after all. If caught, there was only
one punishment—death. Tetnai snapped them out of their negative


--- Page 32 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

thoughts and in a low voice instructed them to do the job as per plan.
Tetnai had already shown them the blueprint of the house, which she
had drawn based on her observations during their meeting. So now it
was time for the final execution.

At first, they entered the princess’ room. It was a lavish room with
all kinds of comforts. The lush curtains framing the bed created an
awe-inspiring effect. The princess was fast asleep. Tetnai knew where
the jewellery was kept; she slowly opened the closet and brought out
the box and handed it to her friends. On opening it they couldn’t
find the pearl necklace that the princess wore all the time. ‘Surely
she is wearing it while sleeping. How do I collect it from her neck?’
Tetnai was deep in thought. Then she entered the room again. This
time she went alone and stood by the princess and saw that she was in
deep sleep. Without any further delay, with the swift use of her hands
and deft precision, she tore off the necklace from her neck and gave it
to her friends. The thieves were overjoyed.

Then one after another, they entered the rooms of the other queens
and stole every valuable object—ornaments, expensive dresses,
whatever met their eyes. Only one room was left, that was of the first
queen, where there was the pot of gold. It was almost dawn, but Tetnai
couldn’t control her temptation of stealing that pot. She let her friends
wait for her outside and entered the queen’s room. On entering she
saw that the pot of gold was kept just beside her bed, on a small table.
She kept still for a moment and sensed that the queen was sleeping like
alog. Then very carefully, she picked up the pot and came outside. Her
friends were worried sick thinking about her. They wanted to go to the
kitchen and loot all the costly utensils. They didn’t have much time
left. They put the valuable clothes in a bag. Then they divided into two
groups, one comprising of four people, and the other of three. It was
decided that the team of four would steal the utensils from the king’s
kitchen, and the other three (one of them was Tetnai) would wait
for them with the ornaments and the pot of gold. They didn’t want
to waste any more time. The guards could come any minute. They
entered the kitchen.


--- Page 33 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

At that moment, the bell tolled for the third hour—immediately
the guards shouted in a long-drawn voice, “The third hour of the
night, everyone careful.’ Announcing this they entered the residence
to patrol. After coming near the back-door they sensed something was
wrong. The door was slightly open, and a faint noise was coming from
the kitchen. They were at once alert and suspected that the thieves had
entered. One of them called out, ‘Who is there?’

Hearing the guard’s voice, Tetnai and the circle of thieves rushed
towards the main entrance. Seeing them run, the guards also started
running after them. There was chaos. In the meantime, all the other
guards were informed, and they quickly came from all sides towards
the main gate to stop them. But Tetnai and her team crossed the gate
by the skin of their teeth and ran on the highway. The guards were still
chasing them. The team of four ran faster and went to a safer place,
but the other three including Tetnai were caught. When she sensed
that she might get caught too, Tetnai put the ornaments into the pot of
gold and threw it into a nearby ditch covered by water-hyacinths.

The guards came running and caught them. Then they called their
female counterparts. They started beating them. They were thrashed,
knocked and thrown into prison. The guards were shocked to see
Tetnai. “The innocent-looking girl from the residence is the culprit!’
they fumed.

3.4

During the time of the heist, the king and his wards had gone hunting.
So the thieves were kept in prison till his arrival. Tetnai was filled with
tremendous guilt and embarrassment. Never in a million years did
she think she would be caught like this. Yes, she wanted to live deeper
instead of living longer, but this was the last possible outcome she had
expected. While in prison she contemplated and tried to figure out
why such a disaster of epic proportions had taken place. This was the


--- Page 34 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

first time self doubt crept in. Although she was the leader, she didn’t
check the back-door before leaving, first mistake. Second, her
obsession with the pot of gold. She took an ample amount of time to
steal it. She had planned to keep the pot for herself.

Tetnai realised that once the king returned, her friends couldn’t be
saved. They were doomed. Now, what about her? She was thinking
of how to escape death. She refused to eat anything. Watching her
like this, her two friends became very anxious. They were thinking of
their families. They also stopped eating. Finally, the king returned and
heard the news. He was furious. He immediately sentenced them to
death. He ordered them to be guillotined in front of everyone. After
the king’s announcement, the stage was set, the wooden structure
erected, the blade sharpened. The executioner was summoned. An
atmosphere of gloom surrounded the palace. With one sharp signal
from the executioner, Tetnai’s friends fell one by one. Now it was time
for Tetnai. She was the chief convict, having committed treason of the
highest order. As she was walking through the gangway, she could see
that the ropes had been tightened for her, the blades sharpened. There
was the naked raw steel. It feared nothing, hid nothing. One moment
and her head would be separated from her shoulders. Tetnai took a
deep breath. For the first time in her life she felt vulnerable.

Before they could take her to the structure of doom she pleaded
with the executioner, ‘Friend, I am aware of my fate, but please, I want
to meet the king once before my execution. This is my last wish.’

Listening to her, the hangman cackled like a maniac, ‘You little
thief! Why do you want to meet the king? No way I’m letting you.
Prepare for your death.’

Tetnai begged and pleaded for mercy, ‘For god’s sake, please
fulfil my last wish, please. I want to suggest something to the king
for the prosperity and improvement of the economic condition of
his kingdom.’ This made the executioner think. After giving it some
thought, he said, ‘Okay. You have my permission. Let’s see what His
Majesty says or decides.’


--- Page 35 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

Since there was a tradition of listening to the last wish of a soon-
to-be-executed prisoner, the king agreed. Tetnai was presented before
the court in chains and shackles. The king asked her what her last wish
was. Tetnai instantly said, ‘My majesty, I want to tell you that there
is something I know through which you can improve the economic
condition of the state.’

‘What is it?’ the king asked.

‘You have to sow gold in the soil. From there crops of gold will
grow. Gold in the fields, golden trees, golden leaves, fruits, gold
everywhere. Your economy will reach new heights. Your wealth will
know no bounds,’ Tetnai said convincingly.

Everybody in the courtroom was stunned: there was rumbling
inside the house, people whispering about what they had just heard.
The king’s mouth was wide open. He couldn’t believe it. He thought
to himself, ‘What is this woman saying? Is she mad?’ But there was
a believability in the way Tetnai spoke that he couldn’t ignore. Plus,
he felt a sudden temptation for more gold. He asked, ‘What are you
talking about? Is this possible?’

Tetnai spoke confidently, ‘Definitely, my king, it is possible. I can
show you how. Please let me prove it to you.’

The king thought for some time. Then he said, ‘Okay, I am
accepting your proposal. Tell me, how can I help you?’

Tetnai was relieved. Her plan had worked. The chains were
removed, shackles taken off. Then in a more confident tone, she said,
‘Your majesty, please provide me with SO acres of land near the palace
and also one pair of cows. I will first level the field and will let you know
before sowing the gold seeds.’

At once the king ordered his minister to give Tetnai 50 acres of land
near the royal palace and a pair of healthy cows. The minister, without
any delay, sanctioned everything according to the king’s order. The
king, however, reminded his minister that Tetnai was a royal convict
and should be under constant vigilance.


--- Page 36 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

So, under close observation, Tetnai started farming on the 50 acres
of land. For one month she levelled the surface, flattened it and fluffed
up the soil. The king kept close tabs. After some days, Tetnai came to
the king and said, ‘My king, the soil is ready for sowing. I have to smash
a gold-disc into fine powder, make gold seeds out of it and plant them
tomorrow. Since it is a special occasion, I request you to be present
tomorrow in the field along with everybody.’ Immediately the king
ordered his minister to give her a large golden disc. She had to burn
the midnight oil to smash that gold disc into fine powder.

The next day, the momentous occasion arrived. Tetnai was going
to showcase something that had never been done before. The king was
present with his queens, the princess, relatives and the members of his
court. There were soft whispers. People couldn’t believe they were
going to see something so extraordinary that it could change their lives
forever. Tetnai kept the gold dust in a small plate. She said, ‘My king,
now it is time for planting the golden seeds under the soil, but one
thing, sir...’

‘What?’ the king asked impatiently.

Tetnai replied, ‘What we are doing here is something very pure.
Only the purest person can sow the golden seeds. They have to be
planted by the most honest being here, who has never stolen anything
from anyone. Otherwise, it’s not going to work. But, my majesty, I am
a thief, a thief with the lowest moral conscience, I must say. I cannot
do this. It will not work. So Iam requesting anyone pure of heart, who
has never stolen anything in his/her life to come forward and do the
honours.’

The king asked everyone, but no one answered the call. There
was a numbing silence. Everyone was uncomfortable. Then Tetnai
asked the king, ‘Sir, nobody is agreeing, so I’m requesting you to do
the honours.’ The king laughed at this and said, ‘I am also not pure by
heart. I also stole coins from my father’s pockets during childhood. So,
if I plant the seeds, nothing will happen.’

Listening to the king, Tetnai humbly said, ‘Your majesty, it seems
everyone present here has stolen something at some point in his or

36


--- Page 37 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

her life. It is clear that nobody is pure of heart. Everybody is a thief.
Then why am I the only one who is getting a death penalty? Everybody
should be punished too, am I not right?’

An eerie silence prevailed. Everybody was looking at each other’s
faces. The king sensed trouble. He couldn’t reject Tetnai’s argument
completely. It had solid grounds. He couldn’t help but praise Tetnai’s
intelligence and presence of mind. “You're smart Tetnai, I give you
that,’ the king said. Tetnai replied, “Truth makes the tongue smart your
highness.’ The king decided to give Tetnai the container filled with
gold dust and set her free. The king asked her, ‘So now that you're free,
what are you going to do the gold dust Tetnai? Tetnai replied, ‘I will
bring balance sir.’

As she was walking down the road, she was relieved. Finally, she was
free. Carrying the gift, she marched towards her house. After walking
some distance, she came to a place where, by the side of the road,
there was a ditch filled with water-hyacinths. She soon recognised the
place, looked around, got down and retrieved the pot full of gold and
ornaments that she had thrown away. She became one of the richest
persons in the whole state of Tripura and never stole anything again.

If you find a rich person now, wearing lots of gold, don’t forget to
ask him/her, whether he/she knows anyone by the name Tetnai.


--- Page 38 ---

4. A FOX OR A FAUX!

There was once a time, very long ago, when a fox became friends
with a jumia.° The fox lived inside a hole just beside the jumia’s land.
Those were fine days under the summer sun. The sky blazed blue, and
the sun was in a celebratory mood, free and bright. The trees by the
side of the hills rose to the occasion and donned their favourite hues
while the flowers and scattered rainbows smiled everywhere. During
the daytime when the jumia worked on his land, the fox came out and
chatted with him, and the pair smoked tobacco in a hookah made of
bamboo for hours. Gradually they became the best of friends.

One day the jumia told the fox, ‘Listen, today I will be attending
a function at a friend’s place, so I won't be meeting you tonight. I will
return tomorrow morning.’ Learning about the invitation the fox was
curious and engulfed by thoughts of various mouth-watering dishes
and desserts that would be prepared at that friend’s house and was
tempted to taste them. Unable to control his urge he told his friend,
‘I have an enormous fondness for delicious food my friend. For so
long I haven’t tasted good food cooked by humans. Ages ago, I had an


--- Page 39 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

opportunity to attend one function. And god, it was a blessing! Such
delicious food! I will never forget it. Please let me accompany you.’

The jumia was unsettled listening to his friend’s proposition. How
could he bring an animal like a fox into the community? What would
his friends say? Moreover, the savage dogs at his friend’s residence
might chase the fox and try to kill him. Also, how could he jeopardise
his own reputation for this? Perplexed by these thoughts but also not
wanting to hurt his friend’s feelings, he said, ‘Friend, it would really
be a pleasure to take you there; we could have talked about so many
different things. But...’

‘But what?’ asked the fox.

‘Nothing, I mean, I was thinking that my friend doesn’t know you,
what will he think? And...’ the jumia spoke with some hesitation.

‘And what? Tell me friend,’ the fox asked.

‘I was saying that there might be a pack of dogs at his house, and
they might not react in a very friendly way,’ jumia explained.

“Oh! Is this what you're worried about? Don’t you worry. I will go
with you in such a manner that not even your friend, let alone the dogs,
will be able to recognise me. And anyway, it will be late in the evening
when we reach your friend’s house, and in the dark, he will not notice
me. And I know how to trick a stupid dog. Listen, I will find a way to
crawl under your friend’s bed in the bedroom. You just bring me all the
food that is cooked—fish, chicken, mutton whatever, one by one. Do
you understand?’ asked the fox mischievously.

‘But...’

‘What?’

‘There is still a problem,’ the jumia replied.

‘Again? Okay tell me, what is it? Let me solve it for you.’ The fox
seemed very confident.

‘I was thinking that at night when the foxes in the forest start
howling and cry in unison, will you be able to control yourself? At that
time if...’ The jumia seemed really concerned.


--- Page 40 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

‘Ha ha ha! You are worried that I will also HOWL and CRY with
them! That is so foolish! Is this the thing you're so concerned about?
Okay, don’t bother. I promise you that I will control myself. Now
everything is sorted, let’s go.’ Having said this, the fox started getting
ready to go.

The jumia was reluctant but had no other alternative. So both of
them embarked on a journey towards the friend’s house, walking
through the hilly terrain.

When they reached the jumia’s friend’s house, evening had just
fallen. The air had become much cooler. Now there was an imminent
danger. The question of how he would enter the house with the fox
was eating up the jumia. He didn’t even know where the dogs were.
If they suspected anything, there would be hell to pay! Realising that
something was bothering his friend, the fox asked, “What are you
thinking? Tell me.’

‘Iam worried how I will take you inside,’ the jumia blurted.

‘Listen, I am hiding behind this banana tree. It is dark now; your
friend will not be able to see me,’ the fox replied.

‘That I understand, but when are you going to enter the bedroom?’
the jumia asked.

‘Hear me out. I guess your friend is now busy cooking, and the
dogs tempted by the smell, will be roaming around the kitchen. I
will be observing everything from here. You go inside; when I find a
window I will slip into the house, and nobody will notice a thing. Don’t
worry. And listen, don’t forget to bring fried rice and a good portion
of sumptuous meat with you. Oh, and also, Bangui.’ How can I forget
that! Ah! So many days have passed since I tasted some delicious
bangui.’ It was all well planned in the fox’s head.

The jumia went inside his friend’s house. The fox was right.
His friend was occupied in the kitchen and the dogs were relaxing
beside him. The friend’s wife was really happy to see the jumia. He
had come to their place after many days. For the occasion, she had
herself brewed some rice wine. After the food was prepared, they sat

40


--- Page 41 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

together and started drinking wine from a costrel made of bamboo.
The wife started singing a tribal song. The fox, with his watchful eyes,
was observing everything. When the jumia and his friends were busy
drinking and singing, he looked around and very prudently slipped
into the bedroom. Nobody saw him. He was eagerly waiting for his
friend to bring him all the mouth-watering dishes.

The jumia and his friends were having a blast. After some time,
they realised that it was getting late. So they came back to the dining
area, but soon found out that they hadn’t arranged for the banana
leaves on which they were to eat. So the friend and his wife went to
the jungle to cut banana leaves. At that same moment, the jumia took
some fried rice, meat and bangui on a dish and hurriedly ran to the
bedroom. He found that the fox had been hiding under the bed and
was salivating thinking about the food. He was overjoyed to see the
food and instantly started gulping it down. The jumia said, ‘Friend, I
have brought this food very cautiously, don’t blow your cover, don’t
howl at night. I just wanted to remind you.’ The fox was so busy eating,
the jumia’s words made no sense to him. He just nodded once.

After finishing the food, the jumia and his friend slept on the bed
under which the fox was lying. The wife slept in another room. The
friend and his wife were fast asleep, but the jumia could barely rest;
he was worried sick thinking about the fox and what would happen
if he howled! He would also have to help the fox leave the house
before sunrise. But the delicious heavy meal was so fulfilling that after
sometime the jumia too was sound asleep.

The fox didn’t sleep. He was afraid that they would smell his body
odour. After becoming certain that they were all asleep, he was relieved.
A few minutes later he too started feeling drowsy. Long hours of travel
along with eating delicious food to the point of being too full had this
effect on his body. He was tired. Suddenly at midnight, he woke up
hearing loud howls of the foxes in the forest and was about to join them,
but could somehow control his emotions. It frightened the life out of
him to think about the repercussions if he had actually howled. He
tried not to sleep. But after some time, he was dozing again. The foxes


--- Page 42 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

in the forest again let out a loud howl. The fox couldn’t control his
urge this time. In his sleep, he forgot that he was at a human’s house
and howled along. The moment he howled, the people in the house
woke up. Thinking that a fox has entered the house to eat the cocks/
hens, they charged against him. The dogs were also alert; they were
waiting for an opportunity like this to embarrass a fox. They also
barged in. The fox jumped high and landed on the courtyard outside
and ran with his tail between his legs. The fox ran and ran. Behind him
he could hear the howls which seemed like jeering laughter targeted at
him. He sprinted, swiftly avoiding the various obstructions that came
in his way. After some time, while running by a household, he collided
with a dheki,’ which was kept there. His body got stuck in the paddle,
and when he tried to come out of it, a rattan basket fell on him, and
the handle got stuck in his neck. He sensed that the dogs were near, so
he ran with it. His lungs and heart were pumping hard as he sprinted
forward. His limbs were exhausted.

He lost track of time while running. Soon he realised that he
was deep in the forest and suddenly he noticed that only a few steps
away a tigress was playing with her cubs. He had made eye contact
with her. Now he was in trouble. He could not flee because then the
tigress would jump and eat him. He was worried sick, but he thought
of something. He went towards the tigress as if nothing had happened
and asked her very casually, ‘Hey marey,’ is friend home?’ The tigress
was confused, how had her husband befriended a fox? But she held her
composure and asked in a deep voice,

‘Why, what do need him for?’

‘Marey, actually your husband, my friend, had borrowed a basket
full of paddy on credit. Neither did he return the paddy nor has he paid
the money. Look, I have brought the basket around my neck. Help me
remove it, then I will tell you everything,’ the fox said slyly.

Listening to the well-crafted words of the fox, the tigress was
convinced that he was telling the truth. She believed him and behaved
cordially. He might have been be a fox, but her husband had borrowed
from him. The fox was very happy. After some small talk, he told the

42


--- Page 43 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

tigress, ‘Please tell friend about me, that I had come. I must leave now.
It’s getting late. Students are waiting for me. I have to teach them.’

After some time the tiger returned. His wife asked him, ‘Hey, your
friend, the fox had come to our house. You had borrowed paddy from
him, he wanted his money.’ The tiger was surprised to hear this. He
realised what a liar the fox was. He became very angry. He told the
tigress, ‘Listen, I have never borrowed anything from that stupid fox.
He is a liar. Let him come again, I will eat him up.’

After some days, beaming with confidence the fox came to that
place again. Like the previous day he thought that the tiger might not
be at home. And also, he had a certain affection for the tigress. He
looked around and asked, ‘Hey, friend’s not home?’ The tigress didn’t
tell him the truth that the tiger was actually in the house.

“Oh, bad luck. He’s never at home when I come. Although when
he was borrowing from me, he said so many things—that he would
pay me by tomorrow and made many such promises. Now he'll have
to pay me with interest. How can you live with this cheater?’ Saying
this he went closer to the tigress. The tiger was listening to everything.
He was writhing with anger. When he saw that the fox was flirting with
the tigress, he couldn’t control himself and roared. The fox was terror-
stricken; he had not realised that the tiger was could have been inside.
Instantly he fled towards the jungle. The tiger gave a giant leap and
started chasing him. They were running through the jungle. The fox
had the advantage of size. He moved swiftly through the various twists
and turns in the forest; the tiger couldn’t. After some time, the tiger
was inches behind; he had almost caught the fox, but while jumping
he landed in the gap between two trees and got stuck. He was stuck
so badly that he couldn’t move. He became frustrated and was roaring
and howling and trying very hard to get out, but the more he tried to
escape, the more his body got stuck, and he couldn’t move an inch.
The fox observed this from a distance. At first, he wanted to come
near the tiger and laugh at his face to add insult to injury, but the next
moment he decided against it. One never knew, the tiger could free
himself and, with one strike of his paw, kill him. After some time the

43


--- Page 44 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

tiger became tired of this unending endeavour to get out. Perhaps his
ribs were also broken, his pupils dilated. He was almost on the verge
of passing out. The fox now very carefully came behind the tiger and
started kicking and hitting him with a log and biting him. On the one
side, the tiger couldn’t move, and now on the other the fox had come
up with a barrage of offences from behind, so he couldn’t defend
himself. The tiger was helpless. Eventually, he collapsed. The fox
examined the body and was reassured that the tiger wasn’t alive any
more. His happiness knew no bounds.

Soon after, he once again went to the tigress. He was panting and,
while at it, started fake crying. Then with a very subdued voice he said
to her, ‘Marey, a tragedy has befallen you. What a sad day.’ The tigress
couldn’t fathom what the fox was saying. “What happened? What kind
of tragedy?’ she asked. Then the fox, seemingly very concerned, said to
her, ‘Your husband, my friend has killed himself. He was so sorry for
not paying my loan back that he preferred not to live anymore.’

The tigress was stunned. The whole world seemed to collapse
around her. Never had she imagined that such a tragedy would strike
her, destroying her family like this. The person she most dearly loved
was no more, and she was not ready to believe it. She couldn’t cry.
Grief dried up her tears. She stayed with the tiger's dead body for a
long time, and didn’t move an inch. The fox tried to console her and
after several hours tried to convince her to return home. After this
incident, he visited the tiger’s house every day and eventually started
living there. The tigress remained indifferent. The fox took care of
the cubs.

Many years passed. Now the cubs were full grown adults. They
called the fox their father. They were educated by the fox. He even
took them hunting. The tigress didn’t mind this, but every now and
then she remembered her lost husband and would growl in anger. She
was very proud to see that her cubs had grown up to become such
smart adults. ‘If only their father was alive,’ she thought.

One day, the young tigers asked the fox to take them hunting. The
fox was reluctant at first, but, in the end, he decided to go. They told

44


--- Page 45 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

him that they would go deep inside the forest and scare the deer, pigs
and rabbits out towards the fox, and the fox could catch them and
keep them till they came out. They roared into the forest, and all the
animals, scared of them, came running in the direction of the fox. The
fox was flustered by the gradual turn of events. He couldn’t capture a
single animal. The tiger cubs were very surprised to see that their father
had managed to capture only a wild rooster. They were disappointed.
The fox felt ashamed but didn’t let it appear on his face. He said ‘Look,
all those animals that you scared off called me uncle or maternal-uncle
or something like that and pleaded to let them go. I am a very kind
person, you know. How could I capture them after that, let alone kill
them? And I am old too. Don’t you realise? Okay enough hunting for
today, let’s go.’

They came back home with a pig, one deer and one rooster. The
tigress cooked a delicious meal for them. First, the fox ate and went to
the other room to relax. Then the kids and their mother started eating.
While having lunch the cubs told the tigress, ‘Do you know mother,
father couldn’t catch a thing. He is bad at hunting. We sent so many
animals towards him, but he could only capture a rooster. We sense
that he is old now.’

Then tigress said, ‘Listen to me, he is not your father; he is a fox.
Your father was a huge tiger. As big as a small hillock. He told me that
your father had borrowed some paddy from him and failed to pay back.
The fox came to our house and asked for his money. One day, worried
that he could never repay the debt, your father killed himself and left
us all alone. The fox told me that your father had entrusted him to take
care of us. And from that day onwards, the fox has been staying here,
and you call him your dad.’

The fox was eavesdropping and heard everything the tigress said.
He knew that the young kids would not forgive him. He would have
to flee. At that moment, the cubs roared and jumped to catch him.
The fox instantly got up and started running through the forest. The
tiger cubs were after him. After some time the fox realised that he was
not as fast as he used to be. It would only be a matter of time before

45


--- Page 46 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

they caught and devoured him. They were young and agile and their
blood was boiling with rage. Suddenly he saw a temple in the middle
of the forest. In front of the temple there was a pot with bees inside.
He instantly thought of a plan. He took that pot carefully on his lap,
closed the opening with a lid and started beating it like a drum. The
hundreds of bees inside started buzzing, and a strong but weird sound
came out of the pot. The fox didn’t stop; he continued playing like a
deft percussionist.

The tiger cubs saw that the fox was in a very joyous mood and was
playing something. They were curious. They forgot why they were
chasing him. They came near and asked, ‘Father, what are you playing?
Please let us play it.’

The fox, like a wise saint told them, ‘Listen to me, this is not a
normal drum; it belongs to a king named Subrai. I last saw it being
played on the king’s wedding. You need special permission to play this
drum. One has to seek permission from King Subrai himself. You take
this and wait here. I am going to ask for permission. You start playing
only when I instruct you to.’

Then he went behind some bushes nearby and hid, maintaining a
safe distance. After some time, he shouted, ‘Start playing.’

At once the tiger cubs started beating the drum and what a scene
it was! They pounded on it and beat it with such power that it broke
into half and thousands of frustrated bees came out and stung them
left, right and centre. The cubs couldn’t take this kind of pain. They
were wincing in pain, and after some time their bodies gave up and
collapsed. Seeing everything, the battered old fox started walking
towards his home. It had been ages since he had had a conversation
with his friend, the jumia. He dared not to go to the tigress. That
chapter was closed.

46


--- Page 47 ---

TRANSLATOR’S NOTE

In the earlier stories, I have flexed my imaginative muscles, but while
translating A Fox or a Faux! I have tried to be as faithful as possible to
the original text. Although, in this story, I have occasionally described
events, character motivations and so on in a different light, in my own
way, it has been very minimal in comparison to the previous ones. Part
of the reason why I chose to do so is because I wanted to point out how
these stories, or so-called folk-narratives were originally contrived and
why they need to be retold or reimagined or even turned upside down
to suit the present orientation of culture, behaviour and thought.

This is a story about survival—about a fox, who from the very outset
has been portrayed as lonely, unwanted and weak. He is always trying
to find a home for himself, whether consciously or unconsciously. It is
only through his quick-witted nature and unorthodox ways of handling
things that he has manages to survive not only the ire of the humans
but also the wrath of the animals, his own brethren. He is definitely
an outcast in his own realm. There is a picaresque quality to this story,
which makes the lead character much more flawed and capricious.


--- Page 48 ---

BIPRAJIT BHATTACHARJEE

Also, the fox possesses qualities that can be deemed anti-heroic.
Such characters, who lack the traditional attributes of conventional
heroes, like courage or morality, are generally less explored in the
world of folklore. In the previous story, Tetnai, the eponymous
character has some roguish tendencies but has a sense of morality in
her which keeps her from becoming a full-fledged anti-hero. But in this
story, the fox is a prime example of a desperado who wants to control
his own narrative in whichever way he deems right, which inevitably
makes him flawed and distasteful at times.

The story is conventional. It follows similar tropes of patriarchy
that have been an issue with such stories. The female characters
are domesticated, meek, docile and not at all empowered. I would
therefore like to mention some suggestions as to how this narrative
can be modified or corrected:

i) By making the tigress a single mother, giving her a backstory.

In that account, she dies while chasing the fox in place of the
tiger, leaving the cubs behind in the hands of the fox who
mistreats them, thus becoming a character similar to Count
Olaf.

ii) The character of the fox as an anti-hero can be further explored
by providing a context behind his actions and the survival
instinct in him. This can also be done through an exploration
of his position in society as an outcast, making him a picaro-
like character—kind of a rogue who lives by his wits.

iii) By turning the story into a revenge tragedy, where the fox
becomes the chief villain—a lousy character who suffers the
same fate as that of other villains.

It is obviously important that these stories be reimagined, but it is

equally important to allow the children to locate the problem and to
realize its severity. I hope this note serves that purpose.

48


--- Page 49 ---

KERENG KOTHOMA: A MODERN RE-TELLING OF THE FOLK TALES OF TRIPURA

NOTES

1. The Kokborok name for a poisonous fly found in the forests of Tripura.
Chicken curry.

3. A sweet dish popular in the eastern Indian states of West Bengal, Bihar,
Jharkhand and Odisha and the South Indian state of Kerala as well as states
in the North East, especially Assam and Tripura. Over time it has been
interspersed with the indigenous culture of Tripura. Here lies the beauty
of Tripura’s mixed culture. Here lies the beauty of Tripura’s mixed culture,
where there has been an immense sharing of traditions, customs, and even
food habits. There are various kinds of pitha but the most popular one is pati-
sapta, which is made with rice powder, coconut, milk, kheer and sugar.

4. Overlapping December and January of the Gregorian calendar, it marks the
beginning of the winter season.

5. Alarge earthen jar or vat.

6. An indigenous farmer in Tripura who earns his living practising jhum
cultivation.

7. A delicious preparation made with rice.

8. An agricultural tool used for threshing to separate rice grains from chaff.

9. Friend’s wife.

REFERENCES

Bassnett, Susan. 2012. ‘The Translator as Cross-Cultural Mediator’, in Malmkjer,
Kirsten and Kevin Windle (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Translation
Studies, pp. 77-85. New York: Oxford University Press.

Fox, Mem. “Men Who Weep, Boys Who Dance: The Gender Agenda between
the Lines in Children’s Literature.” Language Arts, vol. 70, no. 2, 1993,
pp. 84-88.

Malarte-Feldman, Claire-Lise. 1999. “The Challenges of Translating Perrault’s
“Contes” into English’, Marvels & Tales 13.2: 184-198.

Mathieu, Francois. 1997. ‘Les vérités du traducteur’, Le revue des livres pour
enfants: 71-75.

Singh, Manjari. 1998. ‘Gender Issues in Children’s Literature’, Eric Digest: 1-3.

49
